Love	for	a	Deaf	Rebel:

Schizophrenia	on	Bowen	Island

By	Derrick	King

Copyright	2021	by	Derrick	King

e-Book	Edition	ISBN	978-981-18-0575-2

Published	in	Singapore	by	Provenance	Press

Pearl	is	priceless,	so	this	book	is	not	for	sale.	This	book	is	published	under	a

Creative	Commons	Attribution	4.0	(International)	License.	Everyone	is	free	to

download,	print,	copy,	search,	reuse,	modify,	redistribute,	or	link	to	this	book

provided	this	book	is	cited	and	the	author	is	identified.	For	license	details:

creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0

National	Library	Board,	Singapore	Cataloguing	in	Publication	Data

Name(s):	King,	Derrick.

Title:	Love	for	a	deaf	rebel	:	schizophrenia	on	Bowen	Island	/	Derrick	King.

Description:	Singapore	:	Provenance	Press,	[2021]

Identifier(s):	OCN	1243509349	|	ISBN	978-981-18-0574-5	(pdf)	|

ISBN	978-981-18-0575-2	(ebook)

Subject(s):	LCSH:	King,	Derrick--Marriage.	|	Love.	|	Man-woman	relationships.

|

Deaf--Marriage.	|	Mentally	ill--Marriage.	|	Deaf--Family	relationships.	|

Schizophrenics--Family	relationships.

Classification:	DDC	306.7--dc23

“Never	Comes	the	Day”	words	and	music	by	Justin	Hayward,	Copyright	1969

(Renewed),	1970	(Renewed)	Tyler	Music,	Ltd.,	London,	England.	TRO-Essex

Music	International,	Inc.,	New	York,	controls	all	publication	rights	for	the	USA

and	Canada.	International	copyright	secured.	All	rights	reserved,	including

public	performance	for	profit.	Used	by	permission.

This	is	a	true	story.	Most	written	conversations	are	abridged	from	transcripts.

Signed	and	oral	conversations	are	recreations	from	notes	and	records.	The	author

tells	the	story	as	he	experienced	it,	with	Pearl’s	earliest	history	revealed	last.	The names	of	living	persons	have	been	replaced	by	pseudonyms.

Dedication

To	Pearl

Sometimes	with	one	I	love,	I	fill	myself	with	rage,

for	fear	I	effuse	unreturn’d	love;

But	now	I	think	there	is	no	unreturn’d	love—

the	pay	is	certain,	one	way	or	another;

(I	loved	a	certain	person	ardently,

and	my	love	was	not	return’d;

Yet	out	of	that,	I	have	written	these	songs).

Walt	Whitman

Sometimes	with	One	I	Love,	1860

Contents

Part	I:	Together	in	Love

Under	the	Clock

Shall	We	Be	Magnificent	Couple?

A	Silent	Movie

Guatemala	by	Motorcycle

The	End	of	the	World

Part	II:	Partners	in	Adventure

Bowen	Island

Trout	Lake	Farm

Men	Can’t	Be	Trusted

Rich	Couple’s	House

Shooting	Pigs	in	a	Sty

Alberta	School	for	the	Deaf

Part	III:	Divided	by	Destiny

I	Want	a	Baby

Where	Are	the	Bullets?

How	Did	You	Find	Me?

Down	the	Road

Love	for	a	Deaf	Rebel

Epilogue

About	the	Author

Press	Reviews

Reader	Comments

Also	By	The	Author

Part	I:	Together	in	Love





Under	the	Clock

I	 walked	 into	 a	 roar	 of	 conversation,	 bought	 sushi,	 and	 shuffled	 through	 the lunchtime	chaos	of	the	Pacific	Centre	Food	Court,	looking	for	a	seat.	Umbrellas

and	overcoats	dripped	water	onto	the	white	tile	floor.

A	black-haired	woman	sat	under	the	clock,	her	back	to	the	wall,	scanning	the

crowd	 with	 radar	 eyes.	 Her	 porcelain	 face,	 brown	 eyes,	 and	 high	 cheekbones gave	 her	 face	 a	 long-distance	 presence,	 yet	 her	 elegance	 was	 neutralized	 by	 a brown	dress	and	a	perm.	Her	drab	style	contrasted	with	the	gaudy	colors	and	big

hair	of	the	1980s.	She	wore	no	makeup	or	jewelry.	Her	radar	locked	on	to	me	as

I	looked	for	a	seat.

The	seat	opposite	her	became	vacant.	I	elbowed	my	way	through	the	crowd

and	 sat	 down.	 I	 was	 wearing	 a	 blue	 suit	 with	 a	 white	 shirt	 and	 a	 silk	 tie;	 like most	bankers,	I	only	removed	my	jacket	on	the	hottest	of	summer	days.

I	loosened	my	tie.	I	ate	while	she	studied	me	with	the	barest	hint	of	a	smile.	I

smiled	at	her	and	looked	away.	She	looked	at	me	while	she	ate	fish	and	chips	and

sucked	down	the	last	of	a	Coke	with	a	gurgle.

“What	are	you	staring	at?”	I	finally	said.

She	pointed	to	her	mouth	and	then	to	her	right	ear.

“Are	you	deaf?”	I	said,	at	first	puzzled	and	then	surprised.

She	nodded.

I	took	the	gold	Cross	pen	from	my	suit	pocket,	picked	up	a	napkin,	and	wrote,

“Spicy	horseradish.”

I	turned	my	napkin	to	face	her.	She	read	it	and	smiled	at	me	as	if	she	expected

me	to	write	more.

“I	wondered	why	you	looked	at	me.	I	never	met	a	deaf	person	before. ”

“I	watch	lips.	If	you	speak	and	I	ignore	you	will	think	I	am	rude.	I	don’t	want hearing	to	think	that	deafies	like	me	are	rude. ”

“Can	you	lipread?”	I	said.

The	woman	shook	her	head.

“Most	people	never	look	at	each	other.	They	only	look	at	the	floor.	That’s	why I	spoke	to	you. ”

She	 smiled.	 “We	 are	 200,000	 deafies	 in	 Canada.	 Our	 language	 is	 ASL—

American	Sign	Language. ”

“I’m	getting	an	ice	cream.	Do	you	want	one? ”

The	woman	scribbled	on	the	tattered	napkin	and	pushed	it	across	the	table.

“Almond. ”

She	smacked	her	lips,	grinned,	and	put	the	napkin	in	her	purse.

I	 bought	 two	 ice	 cream	 cones	 at	 Baskin-Robbins	 and	 stuffed	 a	 handful	 of napkins	 into	 my	 pocket.	 The	 music	 of	 Madonna	 played	 in	 the	 background.	 We sat	on	a	bench	in	the	mall	and	continued	to	write.	I	noticed	her	fingernails	were badly	chewed.

“Congenitally	deaf? ”

The	woman	shrugged.

“Born	deaf? ”

“Mother	had	measles	at	4	months	pregnant.	Lucky	not	2	months	or	I	am	blind

and	deaf.”

I	smiled.	“That’s	life.”

“That’s	me.	I	accept	my	deafness.	My	children	will	be	hearing. ”	She	looked	at her	watch.	“I	go	back	to	work.	Nice	to	meet	you.”

The	woman	stuffed	the	napkin	into	her	purse	and	disappeared	into	the	crowd

as	I	watched	her	walk	away.

I	went	back	to	the	food	court	just	before	noon.	The	silent	woman	was	sitting	at

the	same	table	under	the	clock.	She	looked	up	and	waved	at	me.	I	sat	down.	She

looked	at	me	expectantly.	She	seemed	to	be	about	my	age,	almost	thirty,	yet	her

face	hadn’t	a	wrinkle.

I	reached	into	my	suit	and	pulled	out	a	few	sheets	of	paper	and	my	pen.

“I	remember	you.”

She	put	down	her	chopsticks	and	wrote,	“Ha-ha. ”

“How	are	you	today? ”

“I	 feel	 bothered	 about	 my	 real	 estate.	 I	 am	 stuck	 to	 pay	 mortgage	 and apartment	rent. ”

“You	must	have	a	good	job	to	afford	two	places. ”

“I	work	at	the	post	office.	I	sort	mails.	Managers	and	union	fight.	Something

not	nice	to	work	there.	Good	pay	but	I	have	Medical	Lab	Technician	diploma	at St.	Paul	Technical	Vocational	Institute.	They	have	interpreters	there. ”

“Then	why	do	you	work	in	the	post	office? ”

“After	divorce	I	come	back	to	Canada	to	Vancouver	because	a	lot	of	deafies

in	Vancouver	so	I	can	get	a	good	job.	But	no	hospital	would	hire	me.	All	refused because	I	am	deaf.	I	got	a	temporary	job	at	the	post	office.”	She	turned	the	paper to	 face	 me	 so	 I	 could	 read	 it	 and	 then	 took	 it	 back	 and	 continued	 writing.	 “Six years	ago.	Temporary.	Ha! 	 But	I	am	 lucky	to	have	 education	and	job	 not	to	be unemployed.	Most	deafies	are	unemployed—80%.	1/3	quits	high	school. ”

“I	studied	too.	Electronics	engineer,	but	I	work	for	a	Dutch	bank.	Boring	but

better	than	a	post	office	job!	I	study	Spanish	at	night	school.	I	will	start	an	MBA in	 September.	 I	 want	 to	 work	 in	 another	 country.	 I	 taught	 at	 night	 school,	 so	 a teacher	and	a	student	at	the	same	time.	My	name	is	Derrick	King. ”

“Pearl. ”	 Pearl	 pointed	 at	 herself,	 looked	 up	 to	 check	 the	 time,	 and	 mimed punching	a	time-clock.	“I	must	go.	15	minute	walk	back	and	PO	is	strict.	Bye! ”

Whenever	I	went	to	the	food	court	at	my	usual	time,	just	before	noon,	Pearl	was

sitting	under	the	clock,	and	we	started	writing.

“I	met	my	husband	at	TVI	in	St.	Paul	but	he	is	from	North	Dakota. ”

“How	long	were	you	married? ”

“9	months.	Then	I	found	him	in	a	gay	bar	in	Fargo! ”	She	stuck	out	her	tongue and	hung	her	wrist	limply.	“I	lost	my	mobile	trailer	down	payment	from	mother

—my	wedding	gift.	All	my	furnitures.	That	was	7	years	ago. ”

I	 pointed	 at	 “Fargo.”	 “My	 wife	 and	 I	 were	 married	 in	 ND	 too!	 A	 strange coincidence.”

“How	long	were	you	married? ”

“7	years.”

“Who	left	who?	And	why? ”

“She	left.	She	said	she	didn’t	want	to	be	married	anymore.	She	said	she	was	a

feminist	so	she	needed	to	be	single.	As	soon	as	she	could	support	herself	she	told me	she	didn’t	need	a	husband.”

“Respect	is	important.	Did	you	want	her	to	stay? ”

“Yes. ”

“I	 want	 a	 family	 with	 Mr.	 Right.	 Children	 are	 first	 then	 the	 husband	 is second. ”

“I’m	Mr.	Write!	Kids	need	a	house.	Nowadays	that	means	two	incomes. ”

“Two	 incomes	 until	 children	 are	 small.	 Then	 wife	 should	 be	 home	 to	 be mother	if	husband	will	afford.	Depends	on	location.”

“Yes.	Where	do	you	live? ”

“Kitsilano	near	the	beach. ”

“Me	too,	2125	2nd	Ave.”

Pearl	grinned.	“2168	2nd	Ave. ”

“That	is	the	other	side	of	the	street! 	 Another	strange	coincidence. ”

A	 man	 with	 a	 gray	 comb-over	 was	 sitting	 at	 the	 table	 next	 to	 us.	 He	 wore several	 sweaters.	 He	 leaned	 over	 to	 Pearl	 with	 a	 big	 smile,	 as	 if	 we	 were	 his grandchildren,	and	said,	“And	what	kind	of	game	are	 we	playing?”

Pearl	shrugged	and	turned	to	me	for	an	explanation.

“She’s	deaf,	so	we	are	writing	to	each	other.”

He	pulled	back	as	though	I’d	said	we	had	leprosy.	“I’m	so	sorry!”	He	stood

and	walked	away.

I	 told	 Pearl	 what	 he	 had	 said,	 and	 her	 face	 became	 flushed	 with	 anger.	 “I HATE	when	hearies	make	pity. ”	Her	pen	plowed	into	the	paper.

“Hearies”	was	a	new	word	to	me,	and	I	was	one	of	“them.”	Pearl	slurped	her

Coke	and	grinned.

“You	carry	a	paper	in	your	pocket	now. ”

I	laughed.	“It	is	for	starting	fires.”

I	 jogged	 downhill	 to	 Granville	 Island	 Public	 Market.	 As	 I	 approached	 the market,	 I	 spotted	 Pearl	 walking	 with	 a	 woman.	 They	 carried	 their	 groceries	 in shoulder	bags	and	backpacks	to	leave	their	hands	free	to	sign.

Pearl	looked	over	her	shoulder	as	if	she	had	eyes	in	the	back	of	her	head.	She

waved	at	me.	I	waved	back,	wiped	the	sweat	off	my	brow,	and	walked	through

the	crowd.

“Hello,	Derrick,”	said	Pearl’s	friend	in	a	hollow	voice.

“Do	you	know	me?”

She	grinned.	“Pearl	tells	me	everything.”

Pearl	 tapped	 her	 arm.	 “Tell	 him	 you’re	 hard-of-hearing	 and	 can	 interpret,”

Pearl	signed,	as	the	woman	interpreted.	I	was	astonished	at	the	transparency	of

her	interpretation;	it	was	as	if	Pearl	had	spoken	to	me	herself.

“So	 fast! 	 I’ve	 never	 heard	 Pearl	 speak	 before,”	 I	 said,	 as	 the	 woman interpreted.

“When	 people	 hear	 my	 accent,	 they	 don’t	 realize	 I’m	 hard-of-hearing.	 They think	I’m	Swedish,”	she	signed	and	said.	She	pulled	her	long	hair	back	to	reveal

a	finger-sized	hearing	aid	behind	each	ear.	“I’m	Jodi.”

“Don’t	interpret	everything,”	Pearl	signed,	as	Jodi	interpreted.

I	laughed.	“I	must	be	careful	about	what	I	say.”

“Derrick	is	curious—his	eyes	sparkle,”	signed	Pearl.	“Will	you	eat	with	us?”

“No.	I	can’t	jog	home	with	a	full	stomach.”

“Then	rest	with	us,”	signed	Pearl,	“so	you	can	run	faster	on	your	way	home.

Today	we	will	eat	Vietnamese	food.”

We	 sat	 down	 at	 the	 Muffin	 Granny.	 Pearl	 put	 her	 bag	 in	 Jodi’s	 lap	 for safekeeping	and	went	to	buy	food.

“Is	it	hard	for	hearing	people	to	learn	sign	language?”

“That	depends	on	you,”	said	Jodi.	“How	badly	do	you	want	to	learn?”

“That	depends	on	Pearl.”

Pearl	 and	 I	 became	 friends	 slowly	 and	 cautiously,	 seeing	 each	 other	 for	 lunch two	or	three	times	a	week	for	two	months	before	we	progressed	to	a	date.	Our

first	date	was	on	14	April	1984—for	dinner,	at	Pearl’s	invitation.	With	a	bottle	of wine,	 a	 box	 of	 chocolates,	 and	 a	 notepad,	 I	 walked	 across	 the	 street	 from	 my apartment,	one	of	the	best-kept	buildings	on	the	street,	to	her	apartment,	one	of the	most	run-down.

At	 the	 entrance,	 I	 studied	 the	 intercom.	 Her	 suite	 was	 the	 only	 unit	 with OCCUPIED	 instead	 of	 a	 name.	 I	 rang	 the	 buzzer.	 A	 few	 seconds	 later,	 the electric	door	opened.	I	walked	down	the	corridor	and	saw	Pearl	peering	from	a

door.	She	grinned	and	waved.	I	followed	her	into	her	one-bedroom	flat,	and	she

bolted	the	door	behind	us.	Pearl	accepted	my	gifts	with	a	nod,	a	smile,	and	a	sign I	 didn’t	 understand.	 She	 handed	 me	 a	 corkscrew	 and	 two	 glasses.	 I	 poured	 the wine,	and	we	raised	our	glasses	in	a	silent	toast.

Pearl’s	apartment	was	simply	furnished	and	tidy.	A	crochet	project	lay	on	her

coffee	 table.	 The	 wooden-cabinet	 TV	 played	 silently	 while	 white-on-black	 text scrolled	 across	 the	 bottom	 of	 its	 screen,	 decoded	 by	 the	 Sears	 TeleCaption decoder	sitting	on	top.	I	had	never	seen	captions	before,	but	now	I	could	read	the news	line	by	line.

I	walked	over	to	her	TV	and	tried	to	turn	its	green	tint	into	natural	color,	but

its	picture	tube	was	worn	out.	Pearl	didn’t	have	a	videotape	player,	so	her	home

entertainment	was	books	and	green-tinted	TV.

Next	 to	 the	 sofa	 stood	 a	 bookcase	 with	 Reader’s	 Digest, Introduction	 to Psychology,	 two	 McCall’s	 Cooking	 School	 binders,	 and	 a	 Hume	 Moneyletter binder.	On	her	desk	sat	a	telephone,	lamp,	keyboard	device,	and	a	box	with	wires

leading	around	the	room	and	up	the	wall	to	the	doorbell	panel	and	the	bedroom.

Charcoal	drawings	and	oil	paintings	hung	on	the	walls,	original	artwork.

We	sat	at	the	kitchen	table	and	smiled.

“How	did	you	know	I	was	here? ”

“Deaf	Aids.	If	a	doorbell	rings	the	lamps	would	flash	slowly.	If	the	telephone rings,	 the	 lamps	 would	 flash	 fast.	 Those	 pictures	 that	 my	 youngest	 sister	 Carol who	is	artist	drew.”

Silent	 News	 and	 the	 Dictionary	 of	 American	 Idioms	 for	 the	 Deaf	 lay	 on	 the kitchen	table.	I	picked	up	the	dictionary	and	browsed	through	it.

“Do	you	know	many	idioms? ”	wrote	Pearl.

“I	know	all	of	these.”

“Idioms	confuse	and	cause	a	problem	to	have	deep	English	communication.

Now	captions	teach	me.	Before	captions	I	don’t	understand	TV. ”

The	telephone	rang,	and	the	lamps	in	the	living	room	and	bedroom	began	to

flash.	Pearl	sat	down	at	her	desk	and	put	the	telephone	handset	on	the	keyboard

device,	 a	 Krown	 Research	 Porta-Printer.	 It	 bleeped	 as	 green	 fluorescent	 text flowed	 across	 its	 one-line	 screen	 and	 text	 printed	 on	 a	 strip	 of	 paper,	 like	 a

receipt	scrolling	from	a	cash	register.	Pearl	typed	her	reply,	removed	the	handset, and	hung	up.

I	sat	on	her	sofa	and	wrote,	“What	computer	is	that? ”

“TTY,	not	computer. ”

“What	does	TTY	stand	for? ”

“Telecom?	 Device	 for	 the	 Deaf.	 TDD	 or	 TTY.	 Before	 1980	 deafies	 must	 ask hearies	to	phone.	Now	all	have	TTY.	This	is	new.	$600. ”

I	tried	to	imagine	living	without	understanding	television	or	being	able	to	use

a	telephone.

“When	 you	 call	 me	 you	 can	 call	 the	 telephone	 company	 MRC—Message

Relay	Centre.	I	have	unlisted	number. I	don’t	want	hearies	to	call	without	a	TTY.

Some	deafies	put	number	in	phone	book.	Bad!	Thieves	know	owner	is	deaf	and

rape	if	name	of	woman. ”

“I	see	a	hearing	aid	on	your	shelf.	You	are	not	deaf. ”

“I	 am	 deaf.	 I	 understand	 nothing	 with	 a	 hearing	 aid.	 Only	 noise.” 	 Pearl jammed	 her	 little	 finger	 in	 her	 ear	 and	 wiggled	 it	 to	 show	 me	 it	 was	 itchy.	 “I never	use	hearing	aid.	School	force	kids	to	use.	I	did	not	like. ”

“You	must	have	had	a	hearing	test. ”

“Many.	I	tested	myself	too.	I	hear	birds	fly,	stars	twinkle,	and	sun	shine.	Do you	understand? ”	Pearl	smiled.	“But	I	can’t	hear	my	TV	without	captions. ”

I	 laughed.	 Pearl	 fascinated	 me.	 She	 pulled	 a	 folder	 from	 her	 neatly	 labeled files	 and	 handed	 me	 an	 audiology	 report.	 It	 charted	 a	 trace	 of	 hearing	 at	 low frequencies	 in	 her	 right	 ear	 and	 no	 hearing	 whatsoever	 in	 her	 left.	 Pearl’s	 ears were	useless.

I	pointed	to	the	chart.	“140	decibels	in	your	good	ear.	You	hear	a	jet	fly	like	I hear	a	pin	drop. ”

Pearl	put	a	battery	in	her	hearing	aid,	put	it	in	 my	right	ear,	and	turned	it	on.

Feedback	made	it	howl	painfully	loudly.	I	removed	it.

“My	breathing	sounds	like	a	vacuum	cleaner! ”

“Ha,	your	problem.	Maple	syrup	spareribs	are	ready.	My	favorite. ”

We	took	turns	writing	and	eating.

“You	need	a	decoder	to	see	CC.	When	I	was	a	child	I	could	not	understand

TV.”

“Why	do	some	TV	shows	have	a	little	window	with	someone	signing? ”

“Deaf	 children	 can	 understand.	 Deafies	 don’t	 like	 signing	 boxes	 and	 prefer CC.	 Easy	 to	 read	 and	 learn	 English	 too. We	 have	 to	 wait	 for	 movies	 to	 be	 on video	before	we	can	watch	captions.”

“When	you	were	small	did	your	family	help	you	with	the	TV	and	telephone? ”

“Until	sisters	got	bigger	then	too	selfish	and	busy.	My	family	does	not	sign.	In

my	youth	no	signs	were	allowed	so	today	still	no	ASL	in	my	family—only	‘home signs.’	Experts	told	family	don’t	learn	any	signs	so	I	would	force	to	be	lipreader.

Family	only	talk	to	me.”

“How	much	did	you	understand? ”

“Few	 words.	 Mother	 always	 say	 I	 fool	 her	 and	 pretend	 I	 don’t	 understand.

Families	 with	 deaf	 today	 sign—happy.	 New	 way	 is	 ‘Total	 Communication.’	 My children	will	sign. ”

“Your	family	can	learn	to	sign	now.”

“My	 sisters	 and	 brother	 learn	 few	 signs	 recently,	 but	 mother	 always	 refuse signs.	I	learned	nothing	until	I	went	to	school.	There	I	learned	to	sign! ”

“Your	family	is	handicapped,	not	you.”

“True!	 I	 wanted	 to	 hurt	 my	 mother	 for	 not	 signing.	 I	 think	 she	 forgives	 me now. ”

As	 the	 kettle	 behind	 me	 began	 to	 boil,	 Pearl	 gestured	 to	 let	 me	 know	 so	 I could	 turn	 it	 off.	 I	 laughed.	 She	 looked	 embarrassed,	 and	 I	 realized	 I	 had	 been rude	when	I	laughed.

“I	forgot	you	hear	it	boil.	Deafies	watch	pot	boil	for	each	other. ”

Pearl	carried	a	pile	of	photo	albums	to	the	table	and	took	me	on	a	tour	of	her

life.	 Her	 photos	 were	 organized	 and	 labeled.	 She	 looked	 happy	 in	 her	 photos, especially	at	college.

“Student	in	college	in	USA	where	I	learned	to	become	medical	lab	tech. ”

From	her	photos,	it	was	clear	that	attending	college	in	a	signing	environment

had	 been	 a	 happy	 time	 for	 Pearl.	 She	 had	 fewer	 photos	 after	 college.	 I	 was impressed	 that	 her	 mother	 had	 sent	 her	 to	 study	 abroad.	 She	 pointed	 at	 her	 ex-husband	 and	 grimaced.	 She	 pointed	 at	 her	 nose,	 then	 at	 her	 father’s	 matching nose.

“When	friends	looked	at	my	pictures,	they	said	my	face	does	not	change.	My

Father,	 we	 were	 almost	 same.	 Smart	 man	 in	 oil	 company,	 killed	 in	 the	 car accident.	 If	 my	 Dad	 is	 alive	 right	 now	 we	 would	 be	 multimillionaires.	 Mother.

Works	 in	 the	 company	 kitchen.	 Warm	 but	 not	 close	 to	 me.	 Sister	 Debbie	 is	 29.

Her	husband	is	teacher.	I’m	closest	to	Sister	Carol,	artist,	28.	Brother	Kevin	is 22.	 He	 is	 manager	 assistant	 for	 cement	 basement	 and	 fire	 extinguish.	 You	 can see	in	Yellow	Pages.	He	is	handsome	and	charming.	He	would	beat	up	anyone

who	bothered	me	if	I	asked. 	 I	have	a	hard	time	to	say	‘Kevin.’	K	is	invisible	on lips. ”

“Try	to	say	my	name. ”

“Derrick,”	she	said	softly	and	unintelligibly,	like	 Eh-ih.

“I	can	understand	you	a	little	bit.	How	do	I	sign	‘King’? ”

“Fingerspell	or	we	invent	name	sign.	Most	people	use	first	letter	of	name	and

describe	something	about	personality,	looks,	etc.	King	is	like	this. ”	She	put	her right	hand	on	her	left	shoulder,	formed	a	fingerspelled	 K,	and	curved	it	down	to her	right	hip	like	a	royal	sash.

“Then	like	this	for	Derrick? ”	I	made	the	same	sign	with	a	 D.

Pearl	laughed.	“I	approve	your	 name	sign.	Only	 deafies	can	give	 a	hearie	a

name	sign.	You	are	not	suppose	to	change	it. ”

After	an	hour	of	exchanging	gestures	and	notes,	Pearl	closed	her	last	album,

opened	 a	 drawer,	 and	 pulled	 out	 certificates	 for	 bookkeeping,	 office

management,	 and	 est	 seminars.	 I	 was	 impressed	 by	 her	 continuing	 self-development.	Pearl	showed	me	how	she	had	organized	her	drawers	with	hanging

files,	each	with	labeled	tabs,	but	her	files	were	nearly	empty.

“I	 will	 show	 you	 my	 goals	 now.”	 Pearl	 showed	 me	 an	 expensive	 leather-bound	desktop	executive	agenda,	almost	empty.

“You	have	no	appointments.”

“Not	yet. ”	She	opened	a	section	of	her	agenda	labeled	 Things	to	Do	Before	I Die.	Her	five-year	plan	listed	a	dozen	goals,	including	 Find	Mr.	Right,	Have	kids before	35,	Learn	scuba, 	and	 Learn	computers.

I	pointed	at	the	word	 scuba.

Pearl	 led	 me	 to	 her	 closet	 and	 yanked	 it	 open.	 I	 was	 surprised	 to	 see	 a	 dry suit,	 air	 tank,	 and	 a	 thousand	 dollars’	 worth	 of	 diving	 equipment.	 She	 walked back	to	the	living	room	and	sat	at	the	end	of	the	sofa	with	her	knees	together.

“Your	equipment	looks	new.	How	did	you	learn	to	dive?	Did	your	instructor

sign? ”

“No	 lessons	 yet.	 I	 will	 learn	 with	 Jeff	 who	 signs	 fingerspelling.	 Jeff	 is	 my hearing	 friend	 that	 lives	 nearby.	 He	 has	 epilsy.	 He	 leaves	 his	 marijuana	 here because	I	don’t	want	him	to	smoke	so	much.”

“Isn’t	scuba	diving	dangerous	with	epilepsy? ”

“Never	heard	if.”

“Was	Jeff	your	boyfriend? ”

“A	few	times. Jodi	liked	you.	Jodi	is	the	most	friendly	girl	than	others	deafies and	HH.	I	envy	her	ability	to	talk	to	hearies. But	her	English	is	worse	than	mine.

Did	you	like	Jodi? ”

“Yes,	but	not	as	smart	as	you.	Tell	me	about	the	accident.	How	old	were	you

when	your	father	died? ”

“14.	 Father	 was	 killed	 with	 all	 family	 except	 me	 because	 I	 was	 in	 school.

Mother	 was	 driving	 the	 car.	 Father	 was	 driving	 another	 car	 with	 all	 family except	 me.	 The	 car	 of	 father	 passed	 mother.	 Then	 cars	 hit	 and	 went	 from	 the road. ”	Pearl	mimed	two	cars	tumbling.	“Everyone	throw	out	of	the	car	but	only my	father	died.	He	was	35.	I	was	only	family	to	go	to	a	funeral	because	all	other

family	are	in	hospital. ”

“That’s	horrible!	Why	did	the	cars	crash? ”

“Exactly!	Why?	Newspaper	and	police	question	my	mother	for	cause.	Police

call	grandparents	and	neighbors	and	investigate	my	mother.	They	say	accident.	I think	not	accident. ”

“You	 believe	 your	 mother	 wanted	 to	 kill	 your	 father,	 so	 she	 caused	 an accident	that	almost	killed	her	whole	family? ”

“I	 will	 research	 to	 find	 the	 truth.	 I	 love	 my	 father	 even	 he	 refused	 to	 learn signs.	He	permitted	me	to	drive	a	car.	I	sit	in	his	lap	and	turn	the	steering.	Many griefs.	Years	to	trust	mother	again. ”

She	began	to	cry,	and	she	gulped	down	her	wine.

“I	was	17	when	I	was	raped	the	first	time. 	 I	was	home	from	school.	My	sisters invite	me	to	the	hearing	school	dance.	Mom	said	no,	but	I	demanded.	Then	she

say	yes	if	my	sister	watch	me.	My	sister	and	I	had	good	time,	only	dance.	Clean.

Three	men	watched	me.	I	went	outside	to	parking	lot,	then	they	took	me	away.	I screamed	loud	but	they	covered	me.	They	took	me	in	a	car	to	a	road.	Two	men

raped	 me.	 One	 man	 watched.	 Then	 they	 went	 away	 and	 left	 me	 on	 the	 road.

Later	a	car	takes	me	to	hospital. ”

I	was	astonished	when	Pearl	unzipped	her	jeans	and	pulled	her	panties	down

to	her	pubic	hair.	I	saw	a	vertical	surgical	scar	on	flawless	skin.	One	end	started a	finger’s-width	above	her	pubic	hair	and	the	other	end,	she	pointed,	went	all	the way	down.	She	zipped	up	her	jeans.

“Surgery	for	my	womb. The	hospital	thought	I	have	brain	damage	because	I am	 mute.	 Later	 an	 interpreter	 comes	 and	 I	 tell	 her	 about	 my	 rape.	 Police arrested	 men	 at	 party.	 They	 think	 they	 are	 safe	 to	 rape	 and	 go	 back	 to	 party because	I	can’t	talk	to	police.	Stupid! ”

“You	need	a	‘Medic-Alert’	bracelet	or	card	so	doctors	know	you	are	deaf.	If

you	are	in	an	accident	you	might	get	the	wrong	treatment. ”

“I	refuse	to	wear	deaf	bracelet	or	card. There	was	a	big	trial.	The	man	who watched	was	witness	and	confessed.	Two	rapists	go	to	jail	for	three	years.	They should	hang!	They	are	out	now.	That	is	why	I	have	unlisted	phone	and	etc. ”

“You	wrote	you	were	raped	‘the	first	time.’	How	many	rapes? ”

“The	 second	 time	 was	 at	 a	 party.	 I	 did	 not	 resist.	 No	 point	 to	 shout	 at	 deaf party.	I	did	not	call	police	to	avoid	court	and	threats. ”

“You	can	survive	anything. Will	you	come	for	dinner	next	week? ”

Pearl	nodded	with	delight.	“I	will	bring	dessert. ”

I	 borrowed	 The	 Joy	 of	 Signing	 from	 the	 library.	 I	 fingerspelled	 “The	 quick brown	fox	jumped	over	the	lazy	dog”	again	and	again.	In	a	year,	I	would	work

through	 the	 book	 and	 learn	 most	 of	 its	 1,500	 signs.	 Learning	 American	 Sign

Language	for	Pearl	was	one	of	the	most	satisfying	things	I	ever	did.

Pearl	 and	 I	 saw	 each	 other	 for	 lunch	 nearly	 every	 day.	 Our	 second	 date	 was	 a week	after	our	first	date,	at	my	place.	I	prepared	dinner	in	advance	so	my	hands

would	be	free	for	conversation.

My	doorbell	buzzed,	but	when	I	pressed	the	intercom	button,	I	heard	nothing

but	 street	 noise,	 then	 a	 mumble.	 I	 pushed	 the	 door	 button	 and	 rushed	 to	 the lobby.	 Pearl	 followed	 me	 into	 my	 one-bedroom	 flat.	 I	 pointed	 to	 a	 bottle	 of tequila	on	the	counter.

“Margarita?”	I	said,	wondering	if	she	could	lipread	me	in	context.	She	didn’t

understand	me,	so	I	pointed	to	a	bottle	of	margarita	mix.	Pearl	licked	her	lips.

While	I	mixed	the	drinks,	she	surveyed	my	flat.	My	stereo	dial	glowed,	so	she

put	 her	 hand	 on	 the	 stereo	 and	 then	 on	 a	 speaker.	 She	 scanned	 my	 books	 and records	on	shelves	that	covered	the	wall.	She	pointed	at	 How	to	Make	It	on	the Land.

I	 handed	 her	 the	 cocktail	 and	 mimed	 cheers.	 Pearl	 tasted	 the	 margarita, smacked	her	lips,	and	sat	down.

“What	do	you	make	on	the	land? ”

“‘ Make	it’	means	to	support	yourself	from	your	own	business. ”

Pearl	fingerspelled,	“C-a-n	y-o-u	f-i-n-g-e-r-s-p-e-l-l?”

“P-e-a-r-l,”	I	fingerspelled.	My	telephone	rang.	I	ignored	it	and	could	see	that

Pearl	hadn’t	heard	it.	“You	said	something	on	the	intercom.	Did	you	hear	me	with your	hearing	aid? ”

Pearl	pulled	back	her	hair	to	show	me	she	wore	no	hearing	aid.	She	mimed

her	face	pressed	against	the	panel,	struggling	to	feel	the	vibration	of	a	voice	in the	loudspeaker.

“I	am	sorry.	I	have	no	experience	with	deafness.”

“Most	of	hearing	men	just	want	to	fuck	deaf	women. 	 They	think	deaf	women are	always	opening	their	legs.	That’s	not	true.	Many	hearing	men	were	surprised how	smart	I	am.	Many	times	I	hurt	them.	I	believe	laws	should	change	to	make

hearing	men	to	be	death	by	hanging	or	electric	chair	or	whatsever.	If	one	more hearing	man	do	it	to	me	again,	I	would	kill	him	once!	I	want	to	kill	them	because I	 see	 how	 many	 hearing	 men	 do	 that	 to	 deaf	 women.	 80%	 of	 deaf	 women	 get raped.	 Mother	 worry	 about	 I	 go	 with	 hearies.	 She	 prefer	 me	 to	 stay	 in	 deaf group.	I	told	her	that	deaf	group	bore	me	and	where	I	can	go	and	find	happiness and	 etc.	 One	 thing	 I	 know	 she	 already	 told	 police	 about	 me.	 I	 am	 still	 going anywhere	I	want! ”

I	 wondered	 why	 her	 mother	 and	 the	 police	 had	 discussed	 Pearl,	 but	 I	 didn’t think	to	ask.

“You	should	carry	‘mace.’	Police	use	it. ”

“No,	 the	 man	 can	 hold	 my	 hands.	 Mother’s	 friend	 RCMP	 taught	 me	 this. ”

Pearl	mimed	face-scratching	and	eye-poking.

“Would	you	like	to	go	dancing	on	Saturday	at	Granville	Island	Hotel? ”

“I	do	go	dancing.	Most	deafies	like	to	dance.	Jodi	and	I	used	to	go	dancing

but	now	she	has	a	boyfriend.”

I	borrowed	a	new	company	car	for	our	third	date.	Her	lobby	door	clicked	open

seconds	 after	 I	 pushed	 the	 intercom	 button,	 and	 Pearl	 walked	 out	 in	 a	 high-necked,	 lilac	 dress.	 We	 greeted	 silently	 and	 walked	 to	 the	 car,	 with	 no	 other communication,	 until	 we	 reached	 the	 Pelican	 Bay	 restaurant	 in	 the	 Granville Island	Hotel,	one	of	the	most	expensive	venues	in	town.

Pearl	pushed	the	centerpiece	aside	for	a	clear	view	of	my	hands.	Her	clothes

weren’t	beautiful,	but	Pearl	was	stunning.	I	took	out	a	notepad.

“The	car	is	from	the	bank.	I	am	an	engineer	but	I	work	for	a	bank	because	I

believed	hippies	about	lifestyle	being	important. ”

Pearl	pointed	to	tiger	prawns	on	the	menu,	and	I	ordered	them	for	both	of	us.

“I	did	not	have	any	date	since	a	long	time.”

“Later	there	will	be	music	so	we	can	dance.”

“The	music	must	be	loud.	Every	summer	we	have	the	deaf	national	reunion.

Last	 year	 was	 in	 Toronto.	 At	 the	 party	 many	 deafies	 dancing	 hard	 to	 enjoy	 the beats.	The	hotel	complained,	then	some	deafies	messed	up	their	rooms.	The	hotel said	no	more	deaf!	Next	year	we	will	stay	for	another	hotel,	that’s	our	revenge. ”

Pearl	taught	me	the	sign	for	revenge:	the	thumbs	and	forefingers	looked	like

birds	pecking	at	each	other.

“You	can	hear	loud	noises	with	a	hearing	aid,	so	are	you	hard-of-hearing	or

deaf? ”

“I	 do	 not	 understand	 any	 words	 with	 hearing	 aid	 so	 I	 prefer	 deaf.	 HH	 like Jodi	are	not	deafies	and	not	hearies.	Deafies	have	two	communities.	Deaf—’D’

and	deaf—’d’.	Difference	is	culture.	Born	deaf	and	not	oral—Deaf	culture.	Deaf later	 so	 oral,	 or	 rich	 parents	 so	 oral—not	 Deaf	 culture.	 Some	 Deafies	 do	 not welcome	 HH.	 Some	 deafies	 have	 problem	 to	 have	 hearing	 friends.	 Some	 hate hearies.	Some	deaf	men	hate	when	hearing	man	takes	deafie	wife	because	fewer

deafie	woman	left	for	them.	Most	of	hearing	woman	don’t	want	a	deaf	man—few

jobs	for	support.	But	deafie	woman	is	good	mother.	I	want	to	marry	a	man	who

cares	me	then	work	together	to	find	home	business	plus	salary.	Plus	1	or	2	kids.	I feel	worth	to	have	them	because	when	I	get	old,	they	can	visit	me,	so	on.	I	don’t care	 if	 I	 have	 deaf	 or	 hearing.	 Some	 deafies	 prefer	 deaf	 children,	 others	 want hearing	children	to	be	interpreter. ”

“Do	deafies	like	hearing	people	to	learn	ASL? ”

“Yes	if	the	hearing	has	deaf	relatives.	Some	hearies	want	to	learn	ASL,	then

teach	 religion	 to	 convert	 deafies	 or	 want	 to	 feel	 important	 to	 help	 deafies.	 I really	hate! ”

“Do	you	have	a	religion? ”

“If	there	is	God	there	is	no	deafness,	no	father	death,	no	rape.	Get	it?	If	there is	God	why	does	he	let	my	sisters	blame	me?	One	time	my	sister	break	the	vase and	blame	me.	Mother	did	not	believe	them	but	I	said	to	my	mother	that	yes	I	did that	accident.	I	don’t	care	because	I	am	going	to	deaf	school. ”

On	 Monday,	 three	 months	 after	 meeting	 Pearl,	 I	 registered	 for	 a	 course	 in American	Sign	Language.	I	was	hooked.





Shall	We	Be	Magnificent	Couple?

I	 telephoned	 Pearl	 for	 the	 first	 time.	 “Message	 Relay	 Centre,”	 answered	 the operator.	 “What	 is	 the	 number	 you	 wish	 to	 call,	 and	 whom	 do	 you	 wish	 to reach?”

“555-1212	for	Pearl.”

“Please	wait.”	I	heard	a	keyboard	tapping.

“Pearl	is	on	the	line.	Go	ahead.”

“Hello,	Derrick	here.	Are	you	free	on	Friday	evening	to	visit	me?”

“Don’t	forget	to	say	‘go	ahead,’”	said	the	operator.

“Go	ahead.”	I	felt	like	I	was	operating	a	ham	radio	station.

“I	am	free.	Go	ahead,”	the	operator	relayed	from	Pearl.

“Come	 at	 eight	 o’clock	 …	 see	 you	 then.	 Go	 ahead.	 …	 I’m	 finished	 talking.

What	do	I	say	now?”

“Don’t	talk	to	me.	Talk	to	the	other	person,”	said	the	operator.

“Goodbye.”

“Goodbye,”	the	operator	relayed	from	Pearl.

I	didn’t	 know	 it	then,	 but	 I	was	 one	 of	 the	first	 people	 to	use	 the	 MRC;	the Western	Institute	for	the	Deaf	and	the	BC	Telephone	Company	had	just	launched

it.

Pearl	arrived	on	time.	She	walked	around	the	apartment,	looking	at	my	books

and	 collections.	 I	 was	 sitting	 at	 my	 kitchen	 table,	 analyzing	 numbers	 on columnar	paper	with	a	calculator	and	writing	a	report	longhand;	on	Monday,	my

secretary	 would	 transcribe	 everything.	 I	 put	 my	 work	 aside	 and	 poured	 drinks.

Pearl	asked	to	see	my	photos,	so	I	brought	my	albums	from	the	bedroom	and	sat

beside	her	as	she	scrutinized	them.

“Why	so	many	blank	spaces? ”

“When	Eugénie	left	I	divided	our	photos.	I	thought	she	would	come	back,	and

when	 she	 returned	 I	 would	 put	 her	 photos	 back	 in	 the	 book—I	 was	 so	 naïve!”

We	 came	 to	 a	 picture	 of	 one	 of	 my	 best	 friends,	 Leo. “That’s	 Leo	 the	 cop,	 my best	friend	since	grade	7.	That’s	my	grandmother	and	grandfather.”

“Grandma’s	 family	 were	 very	 wealth.	 Grandma	 has	 19	 or	 16?	 (I	 don’t

remember)	 sisters	 and	 brothers. When	 my	 father	 was	 2	 years	 old,	 I	 don’t remember	 who	 took	 him	 when	 her	 mother	 had	 heart	 attack	 and	 laid	 down	 on kitchen	floor	and	left	my	father	alone.	My	father’s	father	and	4	boys	(brothers) were	all	drowned	 near	Squamish.	Then	my	father	got	killed	by	a	car. ”

Pearl’s	 story	 shocked	 me,	 and	 the	 offhand	 way	 she	 talked	 about	 these disasters	shocked	me,	too.

“Sister	Nadine,	28,	student.	Sister	Lydia,	21,	student.	Brother,	26,	doctor. ”

“How	old	were	you	when	you	found	out	you	were	deaf? ”

“My	 aunts	 watched	 me	 tear	 paper	 to	 feel	 vibrations.	 When	 was	 2	 Grandma told	her	that	I	am	deaf	but	Mother	refused	to	accept	until	doctor	in	the	hospital admitted.	 I	 was	 3.	 Someone	 gave	 measles	 to	 her	 when	 pregnant.	 Many	 deafies are	first	in	family.”

“Is	your	ex-husband	deaf? ”

“Hard-of-hearing	like	Jodi.	We	open	up	and	talk	deeply	about	something.	She

or	I	don’t	feel	safe	to	talk	to	another	friend. ”

“I	talk	deeply	with	Leo	and	Virgil.	Do	you	have	many	hearing	friends? ”

“About	10.	Deafies—lots	but	I	don’t	want	to	get	close,	just	see	them	once	in	2

wks.	 is	 enough.	 Many	 deafies	 have	 problems.	 I	 don’t	 like	 deafies	 who	 are negatives. ”

Everyone	 generalizes,	 but	 the	 way	 Pearl	 talked	 about	 her	 community,	 either disparaging	or	boastful,	surprised	me.	She	didn’t	seem	to	see	deafie	and	hearies

as	equals	but	as	“us	 vs. 	them.”	Despite	the	language	difficulties	and	against	her mother’s	advice,	Pearl	said	she	preferred	to	spend	her	time	with	hearing	friends.

Pearl	walked	across	the	street	to	my	condo.	We	were	constantly	dropping	in	on

each	 other	 for	 tea.	 We	 scribbled	 like	 madmen	 as	 we	 tried	 to	 get	 to	 know	 each other.

“Where	are	you	going	on	holidays? ”

“I’ll	visit	grandma	and	grandpa	for	few	days.	Then	stay	at	Uncle’s	ranch	to

ride	on	the	horse.	I	am	going	to	learn	to	jump	the	fence	on	the	horse	this	year. ”

Pearl	caught	me	staring	at	her.	“It’s	amazing	how	much	your	face	can	say.”

She	smiled.	“‘Body	language. ’	 Jodi	and	I	go	to	Bimini	Bar	once	a	while	after health	club. 	 We	don’t	get	bothered	there.	Men	are	thinking	we	are	weird	because of	 ASL.	 We	 are	 peace.	 Hardly	 explain	 to	 you.	 We	 don’t	 drink	 very	 much.	 Ex-boyfriend	Eddy	was	very	alcoholic.	I	lived	with	him	almost	2	yrs.	ago.	I	did	not like	his	way.	Bad	influence	to	children	in	future.	He’s	my	good	friend	now.	I	think I	meet	wrong	men. ”

Pearl’s	sexual	history	included	a	homosexual,	an	alcoholic,	and	an	epileptic.

What	was	I	to	think	of	her?	I	thought	she,	like	I,	had	been	unlucky	in	love.

“You’ll	make	a	wonderful	wife	and	mother	to	some	lucky	guy. ”

Pearl	beamed.	“I	believe	that	I’ll	be. ”

“What	if	you	met	a	guy	you	can	love	but	who	didn’t	want	kids? ”

“Forget	him	for	boyfriend	but	keep	him	as	good	friend	for	yrs. ”

I	brought	a	bouquet,	a	half-bottle	of	wine,	and	plastic	glasses	to	our	food	court rendezvous,	even	though	it	was	illegal	to	drink	it	there.	Pearl	handed	me	a	letter, looking	 self-conscious.	 Her	 script	 was	 neat	 and	 her	 grammar	 better	 than	 in	 our speedwriting	conversations.

8	May	1984

Dear	Derrick.

Shall	we	be	magnificent	couple?	…I	want	to	talk	with	you	about	anything	we

can	know	each	other	more	deep	and	also	improve	our	communications	(signs).

Even	touching—so	on.	I	want	you	to	teach	me	anything	that	you	want.	I	like	to try	 anything	 to	 expand	 my	 experiences.	 We	 create	 it	 ourselves	 and	 enjoy	 it together.

I	do	wish	your	separation	is	over.	You	are	hearty	person—wonderful!	You	are

not	naive.	I	really	love	to	see	your	being	a	gentleman—to	make	me	a	woman.	I

really	want	to	wear	nice	dress	for	my	work	and	meet	you	for	eating	together.	We would	feel	fascinate.

I	notice	myself	that	you	make	me	week	and	to	be	loved.

I	feel	like	to	touch	you	but	I	couldn’t	reach	you	because	you	are	working	on

20th	floor,	ha!

I	love	you,	Pearl

Cupid	 had	 shot	 an	 arrow	 into	 my	 heart—three	 months	 after	 we	 met,	 six	 weeks after	 our	 first	 date,	 and	 while	 we	 were	 still	 talking	 on	 paper!	 But	 although	 we had	 connected	 in	 a	 magical	 way,	 I	 didn’t	 want	 more	 than	 friendship.	 Perhaps	 I didn’t	 want	 to	 take	 advantage	 of	 a	 handicap,	 or	 I	 was	 worried	 that	 my	 actions might	be	seen	that	way.	Release	of	my	prejudice—for	that	is	what	it	was—was

our	final	hurdle.

I	 walked	 across	 the	 street	 to	 Pearl’s	 for	 brunch.	 While	 she	 toasted	 waffles,	 she asked	me	to	check	out	her	diving	equipment.	It	was	stored	on	top	of	cartons	of

World’s	 Finest	 almond	 chocolates.	 The	 fundraising	 chocolates	 were	 labeled Silent	Leadership	Association.

I	took	a	box	to	the	kitchen.

“Whose	chocolates? ”

“Silent	Leadership	Association.	 I	store	them	 because	I	can’t	 trust	other	SLA members	not	to	eat	them.	There	are	many	deaf	groups	fighting.	Deafies	are	weak to	make	progress.	I	started	SLA	to	make	strong	association	for	leadership	of	all deafies	who	will	join. ”

“How	many	members	do	you	have? ”

Pearl	shrugged	sadly.	“Few. ”	She	opened	a	file	from	her	desk	and	showed	me

a	logo.	“My	sister	draw	for	me	for	SLA. ”

“That	is	a	nice	logo.	If	there	are	already	many	deaf	associations	then	another one	will	divide	deafies	even	more. ”

“No	 because	 they	 will	 join	 SLA	 for	 strong	 deaf	 leadership.	 But	 few	 in	 SLA want	to	help	me	sell. These	chocolates	are	for	future	sale. ”

“The	expiry	date	is	next	month.	Can	I	see	the	contract? ”	Pearl	handed	me	a letter	from	her	file.	“This	is	a	final	demand	for	payment	threatening	to	hand	your invoice	to	a	collection	agency.	Do	you	want	me	to	help? ”

Pearl	nodded	and	looked	relieved.

A	few	days	later,	I	called	the	general	manager	of	World’s	Finest	Chocolates

and	asked	for	Pearl’s	debt	to	be	canceled.

“Thanks	 for	 calling,”	 he	 said.	 “Communication	 with	 this	 group	 has	 been

difficult.	This	group	didn’t	know	how	to	organize	a	fund-raiser.	My	staff	should

have	checked	whether	the	Silent	Leadership	Association	was	a	registered	society

and	begun	with	a	small	order,	so	we	are	as	much	to	blame	as	they	are.	I’ll	write	it off	and	close	the	file.”

Pearl’s	stillborn	deaf	association	and	her	unmarketable	chocolates	were	naïve,

but	her	initiative	impressed	me.	I	found	myself	wondering	how	successful	Pearl

would	have	been,	and	could	still	be,	if	she	had	a	mentor.	Most	people	overrate

their	importance	in	other	people’s	lives,	and	I	was	no	exception.

It	took	Pearl	and	me	two	years	to	eat	the	chocolates.

Our	 next	 date	 was	 at	 the	 Ridge	 Theater,	 where	 we	 saw	 a	 Spanish	 movie	 with subtitles.	As	we	sat	in	the	theater,	I	was	surprised	to	see	Eugénie	walk	past	the footlights,	smile	at	me,	and	sit	at	the	other	end	of	the	theater.	She	and	I	had	seen more	 foreign	 films	 than	 Hollywood	 films	 and	 plenty	 of	 both.	 The	 Ridge	 had been	our	favorite	haunt.	While	we	were	together,	Eugénie	and	I	had	worked	our

way	through	every	non-bondage	position	in	 The	Joy	of	Sex.	Now,	ten	years	later, I	was	working	my	way	through	every	sign	in	 The	Joy	of	Signing!

After	the	movie,	Pearl	came	to	my	place	and	pointed	to	the	map	hanging	on

my	wall.

“Roads	 I’ve	 ridden	 on	 my	 motorcycle.	 All	 states,	 all	 provinces,	 half	 of Mexico.	Eugénie	and	I	rode	across	Canada	for	our	honeymoon. I	want	to	ride	to South	 America.	 That’s	 why	 I	 study	 Spanish.	 I	 have	 a	 pen-pal	 in	 Madrid.	 I	 ride safely,	no	tickets. 	 How	long	until	I	can	sign? ”

“Depends	 on	 how	 much	 we	 have	 a	 conversation.	 For	 example,	 we	 eat

together,	I	can	teach	you	each	food.	It’s	easier	for	you	to	remember	while	we	are doing. English—The	red	dog	is	under	the	table.	ASL—Under	table	dog	red.	It’s easy. I	 have	 seen	 so	 many	 people	 who	 learned	 ASL.	 They	 become	 more	 smart

than	they	were	before.”

I	stared	at	Pearl,	baffled.

She	laughed.	“I	was	joking. ”

“Hello,”	I	signed,	using	the	sign	in	the	textbook.

“That	 is	 for	 USA.	 Almost	 same	 to	 Canada	 but	 like	 this	 is	 for	 children. ”

“Hello,”	she	signed	the	Canadian	way.	“For	adult. ”

“Sometimes	deafies	fingerspell	words.”

“For	names	and	other	weird	words. Local	 names	 we	 usually	 name	 it	 by	 our signs.”	“Granville	Island,”	she	signed.	“Our	invention.	G	plus	island	sign. You’ll meet	 deafies	 children	 who	 are	 hearing—very	 smart	 than	 normal	 children.	 My friend	Elizabeth	has	a	hearing	son	8	years	old.	He	learns	both	deaf	and	hearing worlds. So	many	deafies	have	hearing	children.	Few	deafies	has	generations	all deafies.	My	family	is	nothing.	I	am	only	one	deaf. Jodi	and	I	talked	a	lot	about having	kids. ”

“If	you	wanted	kids,	then	why	did	you	buy	a	small	condo? ”

“For	investments,	I	don’t	like	to	waste	$	on	rents.	I	don’t	know	how	long	I	find Mr.	 Right.	 My	 friends	 teased	 me	 which—deaf	 or	 hearing	 husband	 I	 prefer	 to have.	 In	 my	 teenage	 I	 made	 it	 clear	 to	 my	 deaf	 friends	 that	 I	 forbid	 about marrying	a	hearing	man. ”

“Why	did	you	change	your	mind? ”

“I	thought	of	having	hearing	husband	cause	of	few	good	deafie	husband.	But

many	mixed	marriage	failed	because	the	hearie	got	bored	of	effort	to	talk	to	the deafie.	 Then	 the	 deafie	 married	 a	 deafie	 and	 become	 happy.	 Depends	 on communication	and	trust. ”

I	felt	a	twinge	of	disappointment	to	realize	that	as	a	potential	mate,	I	would

be	Pearl’s	second	choice.

Pearl	drove	me	to	the	empty	New	Westminster	condominium	she	was	struggling

to	sell.	The	radio	in	her	red	Buick	Skyhawk	roared	with	static	when	she	turned

the	 key.	 I	 turned	 it	 down	 and	 tuned	 in	 a	 station.	 Pearl	 felt	 the	 dashboard	 and drove	off.

Her	 condominium	 was	 bare	 but	 for	 a	 mattress,	 a	 propane	 barbecue,	 and	 a makeup	table.

“Why	do	you	have	a	radio	in	your	car? ”

“It	is	impossible	to	buy	a	car	without	a	radio—discrimination! ”

We	locked	the	door	and	walked	upstairs	to	Elizabeth’s	flat.	When	we	rang	the

doorbell,	 a	 handsome	 boy	 opened	 the	 door	 and	 signed	 rapidly.	 We	 walked	 in, and	 Pearl	 turned	 the	 light	 switch	 on	 and	 off	 a	 few	 times	 to	 announce	 our presence.

A	 slender	 brunette	 came	 from	 the	 kitchen	 and	 signed;	 the	 boy	 interpreted.

“I’m	delighted	to	see	you.	I’m	so	happy	Pearl	has	a	boyfriend.	This	is	my	son,

Kieran.”

I	was	amused	that	Pearl	had	told	her	friend	I	was	her	boyfriend	when	we	had

yet	 to	 kiss!	 After	 a	 look	 around	 her	 spartan	 two-bedroom	 apartment,	 we	 sat down	to	dinner.

“Your	scuba	gear—why	did	you	sell	it?”	I	said,	with	Kieran	interpreting.

“My	husband	left	me.	It	cost	two	thousand,	but	I	sold	it	for	one	thousand.	He

sends	money,	but	I	have	to	work	in	a	picture-frame	factory.	They	say	it	is	noisy, but	I	don’t	care.”

“You	 must	 be	 a	 special	 son,	 with	 two	 deaf	 parents,”	 I	 said	 to	 Kieran,	 who interpreted	 professionally,	 without	 reacting	 to	 anything	 he	 was	 interpreting unless	it	was	directed	to	him.

“I	learned	to	sign	at	two	and	to	talk	at	three,”	Kieran	signed	and	said.

“And	to	fingerspell	at	five,”	signed	Elizabeth.

“I’m	 listening	 through	 a	 perfect	 interpreter.	 Jodi	 interprets	 well,	 but	 Kieran speaks	naturally,	and	he	signs	naturally,	too.”

“He	was	a	devil,”	Pearl	signed.

Elizabeth	laughed.	“Kieran	would	turn	the	TV	all	the	way	up	and	then	ignore

our	 neighbors	 when	 they	 pounded	 on	 the	 walls.	 When	 the	 doorbell	 rang,	 he would	 turn	 the	 TV	 down.	 When	 I	 answered	 the	 doorbell,	 the	 neighbors	 were furious,	but	nothing	was	wrong!”

“It	was	 fun,”	Kieran	signed	and	said.

We	laughed.

“I’m	lucky	we	weren’t	thrown	out	of	here,”	signed	Elizabeth.	She	high-fived

Kieran.

Kieran	 called	 Pearl	 “Auntie	 Pearl.”	 Pearl	 seemed	 to	 envy	 Elizabeth,	 even though	her	job	must	have	paid	half	of	what	Pearl’s	job	paid,	because	she	had	a

son,	and	she	received	alimony.

I	 was	 making	 guacamole	 when	 Pearl	 dropped	 by	 for	 another	 chat.	 I	 picked	 up the	notepad	and	pointed	to	the	sofa.	She	sat	down,	knees	together.

“Often	 I	 don’t	 like	 to	 use	 voices—in	 public,	 talk	 to	 new	 people.	 There	 were times	when	I	got	scolded	for	using	voices	because	it	was	not	clear	or	the	timing was	wrong	or	I	am	too	loud	or	too	soft.	Teachers	and	Mother	tell	me	my	speech is	understandable.	Then	when	I	go	outside	people	just	stare	at	me!	Shit!	I	get	so embarrassed.	It	is	hard	to	speak	when	you	hear	nothing.	When	we	are	together	I feel—mellow	feeling	with	you. ”

I	put	my	arm	around	her,	and	she	turned	to	me.	We	kissed	passionately.

“You	are	a	wonderful	kisser. I	 can	 see	 us	 now:	 waterproof	 notepaper	 in	 the bathtub!	I	have	more	motivation	to	study	ASL. ”

“I	really	like	a	man	to	be	real.	Why	most	men	are	never	real?	Why	most	men

are	so	‘covert’?”

Pearl	had	just	told	me	that	she	didn’t	trust	most	men,	but	I	didn’t	worry	that

she	could	feel	that	way	about	me.

“Do	you	have	hiking	boots?	Let’s	hike	The	Chief	Trail.	I’ll	come	next	Sunday

at	9:00. ”

On	Sunday,	Pearl	was	waiting	for	me,	wearing	expensive	hiking	boots.	They

looked	brand	new.	We	walked	to	the	parking	lot	and	climbed	into	her	car.	As	she

put	the	key	in	the	ignition,	a	warning	buzzer	sounded.	Pearl	sat	bolt	upright	and stared	at	me.

“The	sound	warns	you	a	door	is	open. 	 You	never	heard	that	before? ”

Pearl	lifted	her	hair	to	reveal	her	hearing	aid.	She	removed	it	and	put	it	in	her purse.	She	must	have	worn	it	in	her	car	for	the	first	time,	for	me.

Most	 of	 the	 trail	 was	 narrow,	 so	 I	 gestured	 for	 Pearl	 to	 take	 the	 lead.	 I watched	her	hold	the	trees	as	she	passed.	She	told	me	later	that	this	was	because she,	like	many	deafies,	found	it	difficult	to	balance	because	of	the	defects	in	her inner	 ear	 that	 caused	 her	 deafness.	 We	 hiked	 without	 signing,	 absorbed	 in	 our thoughts.

As	 we	 picnicked	 at	 the	 summit,	 a	 flock	 of	 sparrows	 descended	 on	 our

sandwiches.	A	foot	from	Pearl’s	face,	I	blew	a	whistle	to	chase	them	away.	Pearl

stuck	 her	 finger	 in	 her	 ear	 and	 wiggled	 it	 to	 show	 me	 she	 heard	 it.	 I	 used	 my portable	 ham	 radio	 set	 to	 make	 a	 telephone	 call	 to	 Vancouver,	 and	 Pearl	 was amazed.	 Cellphones	 weren’t	 yet	 available,	 so	 for	 me	 to	 make	 a	 telephone	 call from	a	mountaintop	seemed	incredible.

During	 our	 descent,	 I	 blew	 the	 whistle	 behind	 her,	 curious	 to	 find	 out	 how close	I	would	need	to	be	for	her	to	hear	it.	I	blew	it	so	loudly	that	my	ears	rang, each	time	closing	the	distance,	but	Pearl	didn’t	react	at	all	until	I	was	just	a	few steps	behind	her.	She	turned	and	smiled;	she	knew	I	had	been	testing	her.

Pearl	came	across	the	street	with	a	bottle	of	red	wine	and	knocked	on	my	door.

She	removed	her	shoes,	put	the	bottle	on	the	table,	and	sat	down	at	my	piano.	I

sat	down	beside	her.	She	smiled,	took	her	hearing	aid	out	of	her	purse,	and	put	it on.	She	rested	her	hand	on	the	piano	and	looked	at	me	expectantly.	I	played	 As Time	Goes	By.

“Do	you	listen	to	music	with	your	hearing	aid? ”

Pearl	shook	her	head.

I	 played	 middle	 C	 pianissimo,	 then	 piano,	 then	 mezzoforte.	 Pearl	 heard	 the

loudest	note	and	nodded.	I	repeated	the	experiment	at	higher	and	lower	pitches.

“You	can	hear	four	octaves	with	your	aid.	From	here	 to	here	 on	the	keyboard.

Now	listen	without	your	aid.”

Pearl	took	it	off.	I	pounded	middle	C	so	loudly	I	was	worried	my	neighbors

would	complain.	Pearl	could	not	hear	it.

“Put	your	aid	on.	Sit	where	you	can’t	see	my	hands.	I’ll	play	two	notes—tell

me	if	they	are	higher	or	lower. ”

She	 put	 her	 hearing	 aid	 back	 on.	 I	 played	 pairs	 of	 notes.	 Pearl	 “heard”	 the order	correctly	half	the	time,	so	she	was	guessing . 	With	a	powerful	hearing	aid, her	right	ear	could	hear	a	loud	tone	only	as	a	noise	like	static.

Pearl	 removed	 her	 hearing	 aid.	 “Peace. ”	 She	 pointed	 to	 the	 lyrics:	 A	 kiss	 is just	a	kiss,	and	she	kissed	me.

“You	make	wonderful	kisses.	Who	taught	you? ”

She	pointed	at	me.

I	 put	 a	 Moody	 Blues	 record	 on	 the	 turntable.	 “Never	 Comes	 the	 Day”	 from On	the	Threshold	of	a	Dream	filled	my	ears.

I	feel	her	gently	sighing	as	the	evening	slips	away.

If	only	you	knew	what’s	inside	of	me	now,

You	wouldn’t	want	to	know	me	somehow.

Pearl	walked	to	my	record	shelf	and	studied	the	covers.

“You	 put	 the	 names	 together	 but	 Beethoven	 is	 after	 Mozart.	 Beethoven	 was the	most	famous	deafie. ”

“Yes,	but	if	he	was	born	deaf	he	wouldn’t	be	famous.	I	put	them	in	birth	order because	each	composer	learned	from	those	who	lived	before. ”

She	 took	 Die	 Kunst	 der	 Fuge	 from	 the	 beginning	 of	 the	 shelf.	 “So	 music begins	at	Bach. ”	She	took	 Eine	Alpensinfonie	from	the	other	end.	Its	cover	was of	the	Matterhorn.	“What	does	this	music	sound	like? ”

“It	tells	a	story	of	hikers	on	a	mountain. ”

“What	 about	 this	 one? ”	 Pearl	 pointed	 at	 the	 cover	 of	 Vivaldi’s	 L’Amoroso Concerto.	I	put	my	arm	around	her,	kissed	her,	and	pointed	at	the	cover,	which had	two	lovers	caressing	in	the	grass.

Pearl	nodded.

Pearl	always	wore	high-neckline	clothes.	Her	shirt	had	six	buttons,	with	only

one	opened.	I	opened	one	more	and	kissed	her	neck.	She	nodded	as	the	Moody

Blues	urged	me	on.

But	you	will	love	me	tonight,

We	alone	will	be	alright,

In	the	end

I	pulled	back,	but	Pearl	smiled	as	though	she	were	melting.

Give	just	a	little	bit	more,

Take	a	little	bit	less,

From	each	other	tonight.

Pearl’s	skin	became	flushed	as	I	followed	her	onto	the	carpet.

Admit	what	you’re	feeling

And	see	what’s	in	front	of	you,

It’s	never	out	of	your	sight.

We	 were	 lucky	 we	 did	 not	 become	 parents	 that	 night.	 Pearl	 started	 on	 the	 Pill, and	every	weekend	became	a	sleepover.

When	 I	 returned	 from	 a	 live-aboard	 sailing	 course,	 I	 was	 delighted	 to	 find	 a stack	of	letters	from	Pearl	in	my	mailbox.	An	hour	later,	Pearl	walked	over	and

invited	me	to	her	mother’s	home	for	their	family	reunion	dinner.	At	last,	I	would meet	her	family.

A	 few	 days	 later,	 we	 drove	 to	 her	 mother’s	 apartment.	 Pearl	 pushed	 the intercom	 button	 in	 the	 lobby.	 I	 nodded	 to	 Pearl	 when	 I	 heard	 hello	 from	 the speaker.

“Harroo,”	said	Pearl	into	the	intercom.

“Come	 in,	 Pearl,”	 boomed	 the	 voice	 through	 the	 intercom,	 and	 the	 entrance door	clicked	open.

Pearl	 opened	 her	 mother’s	 unlocked	 door,	 and	 we	 walked	 into	 the	 aroma	 of home	 cooking.	 Pearl’s	 mother	 was	 friendly	 but	 reserved,	 and	 she	 looked	 every one	of	her	fifty-one	years.	She	introduced	me	to	Art,	who	was	her	third	husband,

to	Pearl’s	siblings	Kevin,	Carol,	and	Debbie,	and	to	Debbie’s	husband;	all	were

visiting	from	Alberta.	Her	mother	made	me	feel	welcome,	yet	I	sensed	a	vague

sadness	about	her,	a	feeling	I	had	never	felt	before.	There	was	warmth	and	love

in	 Pearl’s	 family,	 but	 there	 was	 little	 cheer.	 Among	 her	 mother’s	 four	 children, only	Debbie	was	married	and	had	a	child.

Pearl’s	 mother	 and	 Art	 had	 been	 married	 for	 three	 years,	 and	 it	 seemed	 as though	 they	 were	 still	 trying	 to	 fit	 furniture	 from	 two	 apartments	 into	 one.	 Art led	me	through	a	maze	of	furniture	to	a	sofa	by	the	window.	He	had	been	laid	off

as	a	provincial	park	gatekeeper,	and	now	spent	his	time	working	part-time	as	the

caretaker	of	their	apartment	building,	woodworking,	organizing	Elks	affairs	with

Pearl’s	mother,	and	grumbling	about	the	government.	Pearl’s	mother	worked	in

catering	and	seemed	to	have	an	endless	supply	of	one-gallon	jars.

I	 sat	 next	 to	 Pearl,	 who	 sat	 opposite	 her	 mother.	 I	 couldn’t	 see	 how	 Pearl could	think	that	her	mother	had	killed	her	father.

“Delicious,”	signed	Pearl.	“Good	cook,”	she	wrote.

“Put	 that	 notepad	 away,	 Pearl,”	 said	 her	 mother.	 “Are	 you	 wearing	 your hearing	aid?”

“Noo	…,”	said	Pearl	almost	inaudibly.	“Lef	a	hoe.”

“She	left	it	at	home,”	her	mother	said.

“In	the	three	months	since	we	met,	I	never	heard	Pearl	speak	a	sentence.”

“What?”	gestured	Pearl.

“Derrick	never	heard	you	talk	before,”	said	her	mother.

“Eee	ill	sigh	soo	…,”	Pearl	mumbled.

“He	 will	 sign	 soon,”	 her	 mother	 said.	 “Pearl	 needn’t	 be	 ashamed	 of	 her accent.”

“I	signed	up	for	an	ASL	course.”

“Pearl	will	like	that,”	said	Carol.	“It	will	be	an	adventure	for	both	of	you.”

“I	once	bought	a	book	of	signs,”	said	Debbie.	“But	we	live	in	Alberta,	and	we

can’t	use	sign	language	on	the	phone.”

“What?”	gestured	Pearl.

“Derrick	will	take	a	course,”	said	her	mother.

“Do	you	know	any	signs?”

“None.”

“Why	don’t	you	learn	a	few?	It’s	never	too	late.”

“We	do	just	fine	orally.	Don’t	we,	Pearl?”

“What?”	gestured	Pearl.

“She	is	misbehaving	because	we	have	a	visitor.	Naughty	girl.”

“Pearl	 told	 me	 she	 loves	 you,	 but	 she	 hardly	 knows	 you	 because	 you	 won’t sign,”	I	said.

“I	follow	expert	advice.	Everything	I	have	done	is	to	support	Pearl	to	become

as	 oral	 as	 possible	 so	 she	 can	 function	 in	 the	 real	 world.	 The	 greater	 her	 oral skills,	 the	 greater	 her	 opportunities,	 so	 the	 better	 her	 life	 will	 be.	 We	 want	 the best	for	her.”

“Even	 if	 you	 learn	 to	 sign,	 you	 must	 help	 her	 with	 lipreading	 and	 speech,”

said	Kevin.

“One	way	doesn’t	rule	out	the	other,	does	it?”

“It	does,”	said	Pearl’s	mother.	“That’s	the	problem.”

“At	thirty,	you	might	as	well	communicate	any	way	you	can.	I	suppose	she’s

not	with	you	enough	now	for	your	oral	practice	to	make	much	of	a	difference.”

“Hearing	 signers	 don’t	 help.	 Why	 do	 you	 want	 to	 sign?	 To	 keep	 Pearl	 for

yourself?	Talk	to	her,	and	listen	to	her	talk,	too.	Help	her	with	the	hearing	world.

We	support	deaf	children	through	the	Elks’	oral	development	fund.”

We	 ate	 a	 wonderful	 roast	 beef	 dinner.	 There	 was	 no	 signing	 or	 writing.	 An outsider	would	never	have	suspected	that	one	of	us	was	deaf.

I	invited	Pearl	to	ride	on	my	motorcycle	to	Mount	Baker	for	a	roadhouse	lunch

and	then	to	my	parents’	for	dinner.	Pearl	was	happy	to	have	a	chance	to	meet	my

parents.

Eugénie’s	 leather	 suit	 and	 helmet	 fit	 Pearl	 perfectly.	 My	 polished,	 black BMW	 was	 parked	 in	 front	 of	 my	 unwashed,	 brown	 Volkswagen	 Beetle.	 Both

were	 ten	 years	 old.	 I	 pushed	 the	 motorcycle	 away	 from	 the	 car,	 exposing	 the car’s	license	plate:	 Eugénie.

Pearl	 pointed	 at	 the	 license	 plate	 and	 winced.	 I	 smiled	 and	 shrugged	 and started	the	engine.	She	climbed	on.	I	put	her	hands	around	my	waist	and	pressed

them	tight.	I	took	a	deep	breath,	smiled,	and	rode	off.

When	 we	 arrived	 in	 Langley,	 my	 mother	 heard	 the	 throbbing	 of	 the	 engine and	 rushed	 out	 to	 greet	 us.	 Pearl	 climbed	 off	 the	 bike	 and	 took	 off	 her	 helmet.

Unable	 to	 speak	 to	 each	 other,	 my	 mother	 and	 Pearl	 simply	 hugged.	 Father greeted	Pearl	with	a	handshake.

Pearl	 followed	 my	 mother	 into	 the	 kitchen	 and	 helped	 cook	 dinner.	 Father mixed	a	gin-and-tonic	for	himself	while	I	took	a	beer	from	the	refrigerator.	He

and	I	sat	in	the	living	room.

“Son,	your	girl	is	pretty,	but	be	careful	not	to	let	your	second	relationship	be

the	consequence	of	your	first.	Six	months	is	nothing;	give	yourself	time.	I	spent years	working	with	handicapped	people	in	charitable	foundations,	and	from	what

I’ve	 seen,	 it’s	 difficult	 to	 go	 through	 childhood	 with	 a	 handicap	 and	 develop	 a view	of	the	world	completely	free	of	psychological	scars.”

“Like	…?”

“Bitterness.	Suspicion.	Some	deaf	people	and	blind	people	can’t	trust	because

they	 can’t	 know	 all	 that	 goes	 on	 around	 them.	 For	 some,	 suspicion	 fills	 that void.”

“Pearl	is	happier	than	Eugénie.	She	isn’t	driven	to	live	up	to	her	mother’s	and

sister’s	 talents.	 Other	 than	 talk	 to	 me,	 she	 can	 do	 anything.	 Deafness	 is	 a language	problem.”

“It’s	more	than	that.	Some	handicapped	people	believe	the	world	owes	them	a

living—taxes	should	pay	for	interpreters,	for	example,	so	why	learn	to	speak?	Be

careful	not	to	be	an	entitlement.	Do	you	see	what	I’m	getting	at?”

“No.”

Pearl	came	into	the	dining	room	jingling	tableware.	My	mother	followed	her

with	heated	plates.

“Pearl	made	the	gravy.	She’s	wonderful	in	the	kitchen.”

When	we	sat	down	to	eat,	I	handed	the	notepad	to	my	mother.	She	wrote	to

Pearl	 in	 beautiful	 cursive	 script,	 speaking	 each	 word	 as	 she	 wrote	 it.	 It	 was	 a happy	evening.	It	was	clear	that	were	Pearl	and	I	to	become	a	couple,	she	would

be	warmly	welcomed	by	my	parents,	despite	my	father’s	concerns.

As	 we	 mounted	 the	 motorcycle	 to	 ride	 home,	 my	 mother	 hugged	 Pearl

affectionately.

I	said,	“Isn’t	she	beautiful,	Mom?”





A	Silent	Movie

“I’m	glad	you’re	here	this	evening,”	the	instructor	signed	and	said.	“Please	say

your	name	and	why	you	want	to	learn	ASL.”

“I	have	a	deaf	son.”

“I	work	with	disabled	people.”

“I	have	a	deaf	nephew.”

“I	am	a	missionary.”

“I’m	a	woodworking	teacher.	I	would	like	to	teach	deaf	students.”

“Good	 reasons!	 ‘My	 country,	 my	 language,’	 they	 say.	 Well,	 there	 are	 two million	 deafies	 in	 North	 America,	 and	 they	 can’t	 learn	 to	 hear	 and	 join	 your country,	but	you	can	learn	to	sign	and	join	 theirs.	This	is	what	makes	some	deaf people	militant	at	times.”

“I	 noticed,”	said	another	student.

“They	 do	 their	 best	 to	 live	 in	 our	 deaf-impaired	 country,	 but	 we	 are	 not	 as generous	 to	 them.	 A	 global	 world	 exists	 of	 deafies	 communicating	 with	 each other	 and	 intermarrying.	 My	 parents	 are	 deaf,	 and	 I’m	 still	 an	 outsider.”	 The instructor	looked	for	a	reaction,	then	continued	to	sign	and	speak.	“Native	ASL

is	 not	 a	 signed	 version	 of	 English.	 It	 branched	 off	 from	 French	 Sign	 Language when	 sign	 language	 was	 established	 in	 the	 US	 by	 a	 deaf	 Frenchman	 in	 the nineteenth	century.	Syntax	 and	basic	signs	 like	‘man’	and	 ‘woman’	are	French.

It’s	almost	as	hard	for	an	American	deafie	to	sign	to	a	British	deafie	as	it	is	for an	 American	 hearie	 to	 speak	 to	 a	 French	 hearie.	 Even	 the	 fingerspelling	 is different!	BSL	needs	two	hands	to	fingerspell,	ASL	just	one.	How	many	of	you

know	a	few	signs?”

Most	of	us	raised	our	hands.

“If	you	aren’t	sure	a	deafie	is	looking	at	you,	then	wave,	touch	an	elbow,	or

stomp	 before	 you	 sign.	 And	 don’t	 let	 your	 eyes	 wander—it	 breaks	 the

communication	 channel,	 so	 it’s	 rude.	 You	 must	 manage	 that	 channel	 to	 keep	 it open.”

“How	many	signs	are	there?”	said	a	student.

“Five	thousand.	Try	to	learn	new	signs	every	day.”

“English	has	over	a	hundred	thousand	words.”

“Yes,	but	when	you	need	an	unusual	word,	you	fingerspell	it.	I’ll	sign	some

word	 pairs	 quickly,	 the	 equivalent	 of	 homonyms.	 See	 if	 you	 can	 spot	 the difference.”	He	signed	several	word	pairs.	“See	the	difference?”

Embarrassed,	the	students	looked	at	each	other.	“Hardly,”	said	one.

“I	 signed, shy-whore,	 blue-bastard,	 ugly-summer,	 wrong-yellow,	 student-

garbage,	chocolate-church.	ASL	has	charm	every	bit	as	rich	as	English.”

“I’m	done	for,”	muttered	a	student.

“This	 beginner	 course	 focuses	 on	 signing	 using	 English	 syntax.	 When	 you sign	 ASL	 using	 English	 syntax,	 all	 deafies	 will	 understand	 you,	 and	 they	 will answer	 the	 same	 way.	 But	 when	 they	 sign	 to	 each	 other,	 they	 will	 use	 native ASL,	and	you	won’t	understand	the	details	of	the	conversation,	especially	when

they	are	going	at	it	as	fast	as	they	can.”

I	raised	my	hand.	“How	long	does	it	take	to	become	fluent?”

“Few	 hearing	 signers	 make	 it	 to	 native	 ASL	 unless	 they	 are	 born	 to	 deaf parents,	they	live	or	work	among	deaf	people,	so	they	see	them	signing	to	all	the time,	or	they	study	it	full	time	for	a	degree.	The	rest,	with	just	one	deaf	person	in the	family,	end	up	in	the	middle,	often	with	a	patois	of	‘home	signs’	unique	to

the	family.”

“Why	 doesn’t	 native	 ASL	 converge	 with	 English	 ASL?	 Everyone	 would	 be

better	off,”	said	a	student.

“Because	 the	 native	 syntax	 is	 more	 efficient.	 Some	 educated	 deafies	 prefer English	ASL	because	it	helps	them	with	written	English,	but	most	deafies	find	it

snobbish.	 For	 example,	 ‘Have	 you	 been	 to	 Toronto?’	 is	 signed	 in	 native	 ASL,

‘Already	 touch	 Toronto?’—two	 fewer	 signs.	 Best	 of	 all,	 native	 ASL	 takes	 full advantage	of	 dimensionality.	This	makes	it	rich	and	beautiful;	spoken	languages can’t	do	this.	English	has	to	use	word	order	to	indicate	direction,	and	a	pronoun like	‘he’	can	only	refer	to	one	person	at	a	time.	But	in	ASL,	we	just	point	to	a

spot	and	sign	a	name	to	establish	a	‘he’	there.	Then	we	point	to	another	spot	and sign	another	name	to	establish	another	‘he’	over	there,	and	so	on.	We	can	have

half	a	dozen	‘he’	pronouns	in	use	at	the	same	time.	Then	we	toss	verbs	between

those	spots	to	indicate	action.	English	can’t	do	this	without	confusion.	To	make

it	 a	 question	 instead	 of	 a	 statement,	 you	 just	 add	 a	 quizzical	 look—a	 facial question	 mark.	 To	 add	 common	 adverbs,	 you	 add	 feeling	 to	 your	 signing,	 like fast,	anger,	uncertainty.	One	sign	sequence	can	translate	to	dozens	of	sentences!

Signed	 songs	 are	 like	 a	 dance	 with	 words.	 ASL	 has	 puns,	 too.	 Does	 anyone know	this	sign?”	He	made	a	fist	and	relaxed	it	several	times.

“Milk,”	said	a	student.

“And	 this?”	 He	 made	 the	 same	 sign	 but	 moved	 it	 past	 his	 face.	 “Past-your-eyes	 milk—pasteurized	 milk!	 Now	 the	 reality	 check.	 Although	 ASL	 richly

describes	 anything	 visual,	 it	 describes	 abstract	 concepts	 poorly.	 Idioms	 are crucial	to	abstract	thought,	but	there’s	almost	no	idiom	in	ASL.	Think	of	it	this way:	ASL	is	a	 silent	movie.	English	is	an	 unillustrated	book.”

After	my	first	ASL	lesson,	Pearl	did	her	part	by	refusing	to	use	the	notepad.

She	forced	me	to	sign	and	fingerspell.	We	met	in	the	food	court	several	times	a

week	and	were	together	on	weekends.	I	studied	 The	Joy	of	Signing	at	home	and on	 the	 bus.	 I	 signed	 to	 myself	 in	 the	 mirror.	 At	 first,	 our	 communication	 was 80:20	fingerspelling	to	signs,	but,	one	by	one,	the	fingerspelled	common	words

were	 replaced	 by	 their	 signs.	 Within	 a	 few	 months,	 our	 communication	 was 20:80	fingerspelling	to	signs.	Our	syntax	was	English,	as	it	is	for	most	hearing

signers,	because	that	is	the	way	Pearl	always	signed	it	to	me.

Pearl	invited	me	to	visit	a	deaf	couple	for	more	signing	practice.	We	went	in	my

Beetle.	 I	 turned	 on	 the	 8-track	 player	 and	 played	 “Truckin ’” 	 by	 the	 Grateful Dead,	one	of	my	few	8-track	tape	cartridges	that	hadn’t	jammed.

“I	notice	you	never	drive	up	to	the	white	line,”	signed	Pearl	as	we	waited	at	a

traffic	light.	“You	always	stop	a	little	bit	behind.”

“It’s	 a	 habit	 I	 learned	 from	 Leo—we	 can	 see	 the	 people	 in	 their	 cars	 better than	they	can	see	us.”

We	parked	in	front	of	a	low-rise	apartment	building.	A	sticker	on	a	car	read

I’m	Not	Deaf—I’m	Ignoring	You.	A	terrier	forced	its	nose	between	the	curtains on	the	ground	floor	and	barked.

“Dwight	is	a	funny	man.	You	will	like	him.	His	wife	is	Dana.”

Pearl	 pushed	 the	 lobby	 intercom	 button,	 and	 the	 entrance	 clicked	 open.	 A young	 man	 greeted	 us	 in	 the	 corridor.	 After	 introductions	 in	 sign	 language,	 we entered	their	apartment,	where	Dwight	introduced	Dana.

“Only	 sign	 and	 fingerspell.	 Derrick	 is	 my	 student,”	 signed	 Pearl	 in	 signed English,	not	native	ASL,	so	I	could	understand	her.

“Perfect.	Our	dog	is	deaf,	too.”

“How	did	you	find	a	deaf	dog?”	I	signed.

“Many	terriers	are	deaf.	The	SPCA	phoned	WID	to	say	they	had	another	one.

We	adopted	him.”

“What	is	WID?”

“Western	Institute	for	the	Deaf,”	fingerspelled	Pearl.

“Sit,”	Dwight	signed.	The	dog	sat.

“Dead,”	he	signed.	The	dog	rolled	over	on	its	back.

“Watch,”	he	signed.	The	dog	jumped	onto	the	sofa,	nudged	the	drapes	aside,

and	looked	out	the	window	for	visitors.

“I’m	impressed,”	I	signed.

“Animals	 learn	 signs	 easier	 than	 speech,”	 signed	 Pearl.	 “Animals	 prefer

deafies.	We	are	more	sensitive.	A	woman	taught	ASL	to	gorillas—it’s	true.”

“Children	 of	 deaf	 parents	 learn	 to	 sign	 before	 children	 of	 hearing	 parents

learn	to	speak,”	signed	Dwight.	“How	did	you	meet	Pearl?”

“In	the	Pacific	Centre	food	court.	We	ate	at	the	same	time.”

Pearl	 laughed.	 “My	 lunch	 was	 one	 o’clock	 and	 only	 for	 thirty	 minutes.	 One day	 I	 had	 a	 doctor’s	 appointment	 at	 eleven	 o’clock,	 so	 I	 ate	 there	 at	 noon,	 and then	I	met	Derrick.	I	got	approval	to	change	my	lunchtime	to	noon	and	for	one

hour.”

“I	didn’t	know	you	hunted	me.”

Dwight	tapped	the	floor.	“I	give	you	some	man-to-man	advice.	Work	hard.	It

is	 the	 responsibility	 of	 the	 hearie	 in	 a	 deafie-hearie	 relationship	 to	 understand Deaf	culture.	The	opposite	is	impossible.”

“How?”

“Through	ASL.	When	you	sign	well,	you	can	join	us.”

Gradually,	 the	 deafies	 segued	 from	 slow	 signed	 English	 to	 fast	 native	 ASL, and	I	became	as	excluded	as	Pearl	whenever	she	was	with	hearies.

I	 drove	 Pearl	 home,	 stopped	 in	 front	 of	 her	 apartment,	 and	 turned	 on	 the dome	light	so	we	could	sign.

“That	was	interesting.	Deaf	culture.	Thank	you.”

“Good	signing	practice.”

“I	think	I	understand	how	you	felt	growing	up	in	an	oral	family.”

“Missing	everything.”

“Teach	me	native	ASL.	I	understand	when	you	sign	to	me	but	not	when	you

sign	to	deafies.”

“You	sign	to	me	in	English,	so	I	will	improve	my	English,	and	you	learn	more

signs.	Then	I	will	teach	you	native	ASL.”

“When?”

“That	depends	on	you.”

Pearl	 retrieved	 her	 spare	 TTY	 from	 Jodi	 and	 lent	 it	 to	 me.	 I	 took	 the	 device home,	placed	my	telephone	handset	on	it,	dialed	Pearl’s	number,	and	heard	the

beeping	tones.	It	was	the	only	digital	device	in	my	home	other	than	a	calculator.

PEARL	HERE	GA

HELLO	DERRICK	HERE	TOO

DONT	FORGET	TYPE	GA	AT	THE	END	GA

CAN	I	ASK	YOU	A	FAVOR?	GA

YOU	CAN	ASK	GA

I	 HAVE	 TO	 GO	 TO	 MY	 BOSS	 HOUSE	 FOR	 A	 COMPANY	 DINNER	 TOMORROW	 CAN	 I

BORROW	YOUR	BUICK	TOMORROW	NIGHT?	IF	I	DRIVE	MY	RUSTY	VW	I	WILL	HAVE	TO

HIDE	IT	GA

OK	JODI	WILL	COME	TOMORROW	SO	NO	NEED	FOR	MY	CAR	GA

THANK	 YOU	 I	 WILL	 COME	 TO	 YOUR	 HOUSE	 TOMORROW	 AFTER	 WORK	 AND	 GET	 THE

KEY	THANK	YOU	GA

OK	 WHEN	 YOU	 BRING	 IT	 BACK	 PUT	 KEY	 IN	 MY	 MAILBOX	 I	 WANT	 TO	 BORROW	 YOUR

MOTORCYCLE	ON	THE	WEEKEND	GA

OK	IF	YOU	HAVE	MOTORCYCLE	LICENSE	GA

NO	HA	HA	YOU	NEED	TO	DRIVE	ME	GA

HA	HA	OK	IF	NOT	RAINING	SEE	YOU	TOMORROW	BYE	GA

WHEN	YOU	ARE	FINISHED	TYPE	SK	NOT	GA	SK

OK	SK

KISS	SMACK	SK	SK	SK

As	 soon	 as	 I	 returned	 from	 dinner	 with	 my	 colleagues	 the	 next	 night,	 my telephone	rang.	I	heard	tones	and	put	the	handset	on	the	TTY.

HELLO	GA

PEARL	HERE	IS	THAT	DERRICK?	GA

HA	THANK	YOU	FOR	LENDING	ME	YOUR	CAR	TONIGHT	GA

I	DONT	FORGIVE	YOU	FOR	WHAT	YOU	DID	YOU	KNOW	WHAT	YOU	DID	GA

I	BORROWED	YOUR	CAR	NOT	OK	NOW?	GA

THATS	NOT	WHAT	I	MEAN	YOU	THINK	GA

I	 AM	 THINKING	 AND	 I	 DONT	 UNDERSTAND	 AT	 FOOD	 COURT	 TOMORROW	 PLEASE

EXPLAIN	GA

NO	POINT	TO	EXPLAIN	TO	YOU	BUT	SEE	YOU	AT	1215

SK

I	waited	for	Pearl	at	the	food	court	the	next	day.	My	environment	and	hers	were

so	different—the	food	court	cacophony	annoyed	me,	yet,	for	her,	it	would	have

been	peaceful.	Pearl	had	never	been	late	before.	When	she	arrived,	she	stared	at

me	icily.

“You	must	accept	responsibility	for	your	action.”

“I	 borrowed	 your	 car	 because	 a	 wealthy	 colleague	 who	 just	 moved	 from

Singapore	 had	 invited	 all	 the	 managers	 to	 his	 home.	 I	 didn’t	 want	 to	 drive	 my rusty	 Beetle	 there	 with	 Eugénie	 on	 the	 license	 plate	 and	 park	 it	 next	 to	 his Mercedes-Benz.	I	drove	to	his	house.	I	ate	dinner.	I	refilled	your	fuel.	I	parked, put	the	key	in	your	mailbox,	and	walked	home.”

“It	is	finished.”	She	held	her	finger	to	her	lip.

How	could	she	go	from	loving	me	to	accusing	me	of	treachery?	I	convinced

myself	that	I	was	insensitive,	and	I	had	explained	myself	inadequately.

“Can	we	stay	friends?”

“If	you	still	want	to	be	friends,”	she	signed	without	smiling.

“I	do.”	I	smiled.	“The	weather	this	weekend	will	be	sunny.	Do	you	want	to	go

to	Wreck	Beach	on	Saturday?”

“Is	it	safe?”

“Yes.	Friendly,	quiet,	and	nude,	the	safest	beach	in	Vancouver.”

“Can	Jodi	come?”

“Sure.”

“I	accept	your	invitation.”

Pearl	said	that	she	was	breaking	up	with	me	but	then	seemed	to	forget	about

it.	 She	 never	 mentioned	 the	 episode	 again,	 and	 she	 never	 told	 me	 what	 she thought	I	had	done	with	her	car.

Pearl,	 Jodi,	 and	 I	 parked	 near	 the	 beach	 and	 hiked	 down	 the	 steep	 trail.	 I	 held both	women’s	hands	to	help	them	balance.	We	spread	towels	on	the	sand	beside

a	 driftwood	 log	 and	 undressed.	 A	 thousand	 people	 were	 nude	 except	 for	 a bodybuilder	 strutting	 about	 wearing	 only	 a	 chrome	 cock	 ring	 and	 a	 T-shirt	 that said,	“MY	NAME	IS	DAVE	MY	NUMBER	IS	367-0187.”	A	man	with	leathery

skin	 carried	 a	 cooler	 chanting,	 “Tequila	 sunrise!	 Margaritas! ”	 A	 woman	 on	 a rock	 practiced	 tai	 chi.	 In	 the	 days	 before	 digital	 cameras	 and	 cellphones,	 nude beaches	were	like	a	private	club.

“It’s	like	a	party,”	signed	Pearl,	with	Jodi	interpreting.

“No	clothes	means	no	showing	off.	Most	people	look	better	when	clothed.”

“I	like	the	coconut	smell,”	Jodi	signed	and	said.

“Spread	lotion	on	your	bottoms,	or	you	won’t	be	able	to	sit	down	tomorrow.”

“Fine,”	signed	Pearl.	“I	see	pink	bikinis	over	there	already.”

Pearl	and	Jodi	lay	prone.	I	spread	lotion	on	Pearl’s	back,	arms,	neck,	legs,	and

buttocks.	She	rolled	onto	her	back,	put	lotion	on	her	breasts,	and	gestured	for	me to	spread	lotion	everywhere	else.	She	sat	up.

“Your	turn,”	Pearl	signed.	She	slathered	me	in	turn.

“No	boyfriend	today,”	Jodi	signed	and	said.	“Gavin	is	working.”

“On	Saturday?”

“He	sells	investments.”

“How	long	has	he	been	your	boyfriend?”

“Two	years.”

“Does	he	sign?”

“No.	I	was	worried	he	would	find	another	girl,	so	he	doesn’t	have	to	repeat	so

much	talking,	but	now	I	know	he	loves	me.”

“You	live	in	the	hearing	world,	although	you	sign	perfectly.”

“But	sometimes	I	feel	like	I	don’t	fit	in	the	hearing	world.”

“Why?”

“Because	hearies	think	listening	is	more	important	than	seeing.”

“Make	small	signs,”	signed	Pearl.	“Deafies	can	read	ASL	from	far	away,	then

gossip.	Don’t	discuss	private	things.”

Jodi	removed	her	hearing	aids	and	put	them	in	her	backpack.	We	swam	in	the surf	with	the	crowd.

“Derrick!”	shouted	a	voice.

I	turned	to	see	Eugénie,	waving.	It	had	been	less	than	a	year	since	she	left,	but I	 felt	 nothing	 for	 her.	 We	 waded	 to	 the	 shore.	 I	 introduced	 the	 women	 to	 each other,	speaking	and	signing.	Jodi	was	deaf	without	her	hearing	aids,	so	I	did	my

best	to	interpret.

“A	different	way	to	meet—everyone	nude,”	Pearl	signed.

“I	saw	your	car,	and	I	came	down.	It’s	easy	to	spot	a	car	with	my	name	on	it!”

said	Eugénie.

“Let’s	sit	down.	Our	towels	are	over	there,”	I	signed	and	said.

Eugénie	sat	cross-legged	next	to	Pearl	and	opened	her	backpack.	She	pulled

out	 a	 clipboard.	 Her	 clipboard	 and	 a	 pen	 shuttled	 between	 Pearl	 and	 Eugénie.

Jodi	and	I	walked	to	the	suntanned	hawker	and	bought	four	margaritas.

Jodi	 put	 her	 hearing	 aids	 back	 on	 and	 began	 interpreting.	 Eugénie	 put	 the clipboard	away.

“Try	 buying	 margaritas	 on	 any	 other	 beach!	 I	 love	 Wreck	 Beach,”	 said

Eugénie.

“Me,	too.	No	police—and	no	plainclothesmen,	either!”	I	laughed.

“Did	you	bring	your	Minox?”	said	Eugénie.

“Yes.”

“Would	you	like	me	to	take	a	photo	of	the	three	of	you?”

“Of	course!”	I	said.

Eugénie	 took	 our	 photo	 sitting	 nude	 in	 front	 of	 the	 log.	 I	 offered	 our sandwiches,	 but	 she	 stood	 up	 and	 said,	 “I	 must	 go.	 I	 enjoyed	 my	 conversation with	Pearl.”	She	put	on	her	clothes,	and	wandered	away.

“I	don’t	understand	why	she	left	you.	She	wrote	that	you	did	nothing	wrong,

but	she	decided	to	be	single.”

“Eugénie	moved	out	a	few	months	after	I	found	semen	in	our	bed.	She	told

me	it	was	her	professor’s	semen,	and	she	had	been	seeing	him	in	our	bed	in	the

afternoon	for	months.	She	told	me	his	name	and	that	he	was	married,	seventeen

years	 older,	 and	 a	 Cambridge	 Ph.D.	 He	 could	 do	 more	 for	 her	 career	 than	 I could,	 and	 her	 career	 was	 everything	 to	 her.	 She	 left	 because	 she	 was	 his mistress.	Her	grandmother,	mother,	and	sister	are	actresses,	and	single,	and	she

felt	her	mother	looked	down	at	her.	I	even	watched	them	beat	her	at	charades.”

“What’s	 charades?”	 I	 explained	 the	 game,	 and	 Pearl	 laughed.	 “Deafies	 will always	win.	I	don’t	care	what	anyone	thinks	of	me.	Did	Eugénie	offer	to	take	our

photo?”

I	nodded.

“I	knew	it!	She	was	testing	us	to	see	if	we	would	hold	hands.”

Jodi	laughed.	“I	hope	you	pass	Pearl’s	tests.	Deafie-hearie	works	if	the	hearie

has	 the	 patience	 to	 be	 an	 interpreter,	 secretary,	 and	 everything.	 Hearie-hearie couples	can	share	50:50,	but	deafie-hearie	must	share	80:20.”

I	lay	back	on	the	towel	and	looked	up	at	the	silhouettes	of	the	women.	Pearl,

despite	her	quirks,	made	me	happy.	I	could	imagine	spending	my	life	with	Pearl.

I	kissed	Pearl,	put	my	.22	rifle	and	cartridges	in	the	trunk	of	her	car,	and	climbed in.	 We	 drove	 to	 Jeff’s	 flat.	 Pearl	 introduced	 me	 to	 Jeff,	 her	 previous	 lover,	 by fingerspelling.	Jeff	got	in	the	back	seat.

“You	talk	while	I	drive,”	Pearl	signed.	We	drove	off.

“How	did	you	meet	Pearl,	Jeff?”

“Her	friend	Jodi	is	my	friend	Gavin’s	girlfriend.	Pearl	never	has	a	notepad—

on	principle—so	I	learned	fingerspelling	so	I	could	talk	to	her	while	Gavin	was

with	Jodi.”

“Why	not	learn	some	signs?”

“I	 pick	 fights	 I	 can	 win.	 Learning	 to	 sign	 is	 like	 learning	 to	 play	 guitar.	 It’s easy	to	do	badly,	hard	to	do	well.”

“What	do	you	do	for	a	living?”

“Real	estate—now	also	for	deaf	clients.”	Jeff	grinned.

“You	didn’t	learn	fingerspelling	only	for	Pearl.”

“That’s	 true,	 but	 that’s	 why	 I	 started	 it.	 Try	 explaining	 ‘nothing	 could	 be further	from	the	truth’	to	Pearl.	I	used	a	dictionary.	I	used	a	diagram.	I	gave	up.”

Jeff	and	I	heard	a	police	siren.	Pearl	saw	flashing	lights	in	her	mirror,	pulled

over,	and	rolled	down	the	window.

“Turn	the	radio	up.	Tune	it	between	stations,	and	shut	up,”	said	Jeff.

A	policeman	approached.	“Your	license,	registration,	and	insurance,	please.”

The	car	radio	roared	static	noise.

“I’m	deaf,”	Pearl	signed.

The	policeman	looked	at	Jeff	and	me.	“Are	you	deaf?”

“Deaf,”	we	signed,	nodding.

The	 policeman	 wrote	 in	 his	 notebook	 and	 showed	 it	 to	 Pearl.	 Slowly,	 Pearl unlocked	the	glovebox,	removed	the	papers,	and	passed	them	to	the	policeman.

Jeff	and	I	discussed	the	weather	by	fingerspelling.

The	policeman	had	written	a	note	to	tell	Pearl	she	was	speeding,	but	he	would

give	 her	 a	 warning.	 She	 wrote	 a	 note	 promising	 to	 slow	 down.	 After	 he	 drove away,	I	turned	the	radio	off,	and	we	all	roared	with	laughter.

“You	were	wonderful	actors,”	Pearl	signed,	laughing,	as	I	interpreted.

“Cops	 give	 deafies	 a	 break,”	 said	 Jeff.	 “Most	 are	 safe	 drivers—when	 you

can’t	hear,	you	keep	your	eyes	open!”

“I	never	had	a	ticket.	But	deafies	have	to	be	careful	with	police	not	to	be	shot

reaching	 for	 a	 notepad	 because	 he	 thinks	 we	 are	 reaching	 for	 a	 gun,”	 signed Pearl.

“I	 travel	 with	 a	 cop,	 so	 I	 don’t	 get	 tickets.	 When	 Leo	 and	 I	 ride	 our motorcycles,	they	can’t	give	me	a	ticket	but	let	him	off	a	warning.”

We	drove	off.	I	stopped	interpreting	so	Pearl	could	concentrate	on	driving.

“It’s	 been	 a	 long	 time	 since	 I’ve	 gone	 shooting.	 I’ve	 got	 a	 30-06	 hunting rifle,”	said	Jeff.

“Why	didn’t	you	bring	it	today?”

“It’s	up	north—disaster	planning.	My	friend	and	I	are	stocking	up.”

“You’re	a	survivalist?”

“I’ll	do	whatever	I	need	to	do	to	survive.”

Pearl	 pulled	 into	 the	 Barnet	 Rifle	 Club	 parking	 lot.	 The	 sound	 of	 gunfire crackled	through	the	air.	I	took	my	rifle	out	of	the	car.

“An	AR7,”	said	Jeff.	“The	US	Air	Force	survival	gun.”

Jeff	rented	a	rifle,	and	we	all	rented	hearing	protectors.	We	sat	at	a	table	in	the gallery.	With	the	hearing	protectors	on,	Jeff	and	I	fingerspelled	to	each	other	and to	Pearl,	who	was	the	only	woman	on	the	range.	We	jumped	from	an	explosion

at	the	next	table.	A	shooter	in	a	red	quilted	shirt	had	fired	a	hunting	rifle.

“I	heard	that,	and	I	felt	that,	too,”	Pearl	signed.

I	fired	two	shots	at	the	100-meter	target,	hitting	it	on	one	side.	Jeff	took	two

shots,	 missing	 the	 target.	 I	 helped	 Pearl	 to	 use	 my	 gun.	 She	 fired	 and	 hit	 the target,	 and	 when	 she	 saw	 the	 hole	 in	 it,	 she	 grinned.	 She	 fired	 again	 and	 hit	 a bull’s-eye.	We	all	took	turns,	Pearl	using	both	rifles.

“Let’s	try	the	300-meter	target,”	I	signed.

Jeff	and	I	hit	the	distant	target	occasionally,	but	Pearl	hit	it	often.

The	hunting	rifle	next	to	us	roared	again.	We	turned	to	the	shooter.

“Do	you	want	to	try	this	one?”	the	shooter	signed	to	Pearl.

Jeff	and	I	were	astonished	he	could	sign,	but	not	Pearl.

“Fine,”	signed	Pearl.

He	lifted	the	heavy	rifle	into	her	arms.	“Hold	it	firmly,”	he	signed.

Pearl	raised	it,	sighted	the	target,	and	fired.	The	recoil	knocked	her	shoulder

back.	 She	 lay	 down	 the	 weapon	 and	 checked	 the	 target	 through	 the	 spotting telescope.	“The	center.”	She	beamed	with	pride.

“My	cousin	is	deaf,	and	he’s	a	good	shot,	too,”	signed	the	shooter.

After	an	hour,	we	ran	out	of	ammunition.	During	the	cease-fire,	we	gathered

our	targets,	returned	the	rented	items,	and	walked	outside.

“A	souvenir,”	signed	Jeff,	handing	the	bull’s-eye	to	Pearl.

While	Pearl	drove,	Jeff	continued	talking	from	the	back	seat.	It	is	awkward	to sign	 while	 driving,	 so	 my	 drives	 with	 Pearl	 had	 little	 conversation	 except	 at traffic	lights.

“Pearl’s	 at	 home	 on	 the	 range,”	 said	 Jeff.	 “Lock	 up	 your	 ammunition,	 and don’t	mess	with	her.	She’s	incredible—I	hope	it	works	out.	Listen	to	her	dreams.

Help	her	finish	things	she	starts.	Did	you	see	the	crochets	at	her	place?	Did	you ever	see	a	finished	one?”

“No.”

“You	see?	Her	relationships,	too.	You	would	expect	her	to	be	tough	after	what

she’s	been	through,	but	she’s	not.	She’s	a	sucker.	Ever	heard	of	 est?”

“Vaguely.	What’s	 est?”

“Werner	Erhard’s	feel-good	factory,	the	biggest	scam	on	the	planet.	Pay	$300

to	forget	your	personality,	find	your	new	self,	and	set	yourself	free.”

Pearl	noticed	we	were	speaking	more	quietly.	I	turned	on	the	radio	and	tuned

into	a	station,	trying	to	feign	disinterest	in	what	Jeff	had	to	say.

“Did	you	try	to	talk	her	out	of	it?”

“It	 didn’t	 work.	 Pearl	 invited	 me,	 so	 I	 saw	 it	 myself.	 You	 share	 your	 life	 in four-day	seminars,	fourteen	hours	at	a	stretch,	with	wristwatches	removed.	You

listen	to	crap	like	facts	have	no	meaning—our	stories	give	facts	meaning.	Ride

your	 horse	 in	 the	 direction	 it’s	 going.	 If	 you	 keep	 saying	 it	 the	 way	 it	 is,	 your word	 is	 law	 in	 the	 universe.	 Sign	 up	 for	 special	 courses!	 Bring	 your	 friends!

Pearl	is	keeping	it	a	secret	from	you	because	participants	swear	that	they	will	not tell	anyone	the	contents	because	that	would	spoil	the	show	for	others	when	they

take	the	course—and	make	it	unlikely	anyone	else	would	sign	up.	Then	they	get

the	 participants	 to	 volunteer	 to	 work	 for	 free	 for	 a	 corporation	 as	 if	 it	 were	 a church.	Pearl	did.”

Pearl	 dropped	 Jeff	 off	 and	 then	 drove	 us	 to	 my	 place.	 When	 I	 opened	 my door,	the	aroma	of	beef	stew	wafted	out.	I	pointed	to	my	slow	cooker.

“This	is	how	I	welcome	myself	home	as	a	single	man.”

After	a	beef	bourguignon	dinner	with	baguette	and	wine,	I	put	a	box	on	the

kitchen	 table.	 I	 opened	 it	 to	 reveal	 a	 .32	 caliber	 Walther	 PPK	 pistol.	 It	 was	 a collector’s	 item—a	 gun	 used	 by	 the	 Gestapo	 and	 James	 Bond.	 It	 had	 been decommissioned	by	the	German	police,	and	the	German	eagle	was	on	it.	I	took

the	 empty	 magazine	 out	 of	 the	 pistol,	 pulled	 the	 slide	 back	 to	 prove	 it	 was unloaded,	and	handed	my	toy	to	Pearl.

“Why	do	you	own	a	gun?”

“For	shooting	with	Leo.	I	just	bought	it.”

“Why	didn’t	you	bring	it	for	shooting	today?”

“I	don’t	have	a	permit	to	carry	it	there,	so	it	has	to	stay	here.”

Later,	 we	 continued	 signing	 in	 a	 bubble	 bath.	 It	 was	 great	 not	 to	 need	 the notepad	 anymore.	 In	 bed,	 she	 turned	 off	 the	 lights,	 wrapped	 my	 hands	 around hers	under	the	sheets,	and	formed	signs.	We	usually	left	a	night-light	on	so	we

could	keep	chatting	side-by-side	with	our	arms	above	the	sheets,	even	though	it

was	slower	to	sign	when	looking	at	the	signs	from	the	rear	instead	of	the	front;

now,	 in	 the	 dark,	 I	 had	 to	 trace	 the	 shape	 of	 each	 sign	 in	 her	 hand	 with	 my fingers.

“I	love	you,”	Pearl	signed.

“I	 miss	 you	 when	 you	 aren’t	 visiting,”	 I	 signed,	 cooking	 a	 breakfast	 of	 huevos rancheros	with	tortillas	and	beans.	“These	are	called	refried	beans.	Mexicans	say that’s	because	they	never	do	anything	right	the	first	time.”

“I	understand	that	joke,”	signed	Pearl,	smiling.

“Live	with	me.	You	can	stop	paying	rent.	I	will	share	everything.”

Pearl	hugged	me.	“We	can	be	together	every	day.”

We	were	in	love,	but	we	had	made	a	practical	decision:	it	would	save	both	of

us	 money.	 We	 didn’t	 discuss	 the	 timing	 for	 starting	 a	 family	 or	 when	 I	 might divorce	 and	 we	 might	 marry.	 It	 was	 the	 same	 casual	 way	 that	 Eugénie	 and	 I began	living	together.

“We	can	store	your	furniture	in	your	condo	until	it	sells.	I	can	swap	my	car

for	 Eugénie’s	 bicycle	 that	 matches	 mine	 so	 we	 can	 cycle	 together.	 Your	 car	 is enough	 for	 both	 of	 us.	 I	 have	 the	 motorcycle.	 We	 can	 share	 a	 bank	 account.	 I know	I	can	trust	you.”

“That	 isn’t	 the	 sign	 for	 trust—it’s	 the	 sign	 for	 penis.	 Those	 two	 signs	 are similar:	trust-penis-trust-penis.”

I	laughed.	“Never	trust	a	penis.”

“You	can	teach	me	computers	to	manage	our	bank	account.”

“Fine.	How	much	notice	do	you	have	to	give	your	landlord?”

“What	do	you	mean,	‘notice?’”

“You	have	to	tell	the	landlord	before	you	go—how	many	months?”

Pearl	looked	puzzled.

“Show	me	your	lease,	and	I	will	write	your	notice	letter	for	you.”

Pearl	kissed	me.

Our	 lives	 changed	 quickly.	 Pearl	 moved	 in	 with	 me	 six	 months	 after	 we	 met.	 I reserved	 a	 U-Haul	 truck,	 collected	 cartons	 from	 the	 supermarket,	 and	 bought Pearl	 a	 negligee	 as	 a	 welcome	 gift.	 We	 measured	 our	 furniture	 and	 planned which	 piece	 would	 fit	 where	 and	 which	 leftovers	 would	 be	 stored	 in	 her condominium.

On	 moving	 day,	 I	 collected	 the	 truck	 and	 parked	 it	 next	 to	 her	 apartment.

When	I	rang	the	bell	and	entered,	I	found	Pearl	distraught—angry	at	the	world,

furious	with	herself.

“Blender,	camera,	suitcase,	vacuum,	the	pictures	my	sister	painted,	all	gone.	I

put	them	in	my	car	last	night	to	be	ready	to	move	today.	Thieves	broke	into	my

car.	Why	always	 me? ”	 I	 hugged	 Pearl	 as	 she	 started	 to	 cry.	 “They	 dumped	 my diving	equipment	all	over	the	parking	lot.”

“Cheer	up;	we	don’t	need	two	vacuum	cleaners.	Get	a	police	report	to	make

an	insurance	claim,	and	get	some	money	back.”

Pearl	pulled	a	folder	labeled	“Insurance”	from	a	cardboard	carton	and	handed

it	to	me.

“It’s	expired.	You	filed	an	expired	policy	from	your	old	address.”

Pearl	resumed	crying.	I	handed	her	a	key.	“My	home	is	our	home.	This	will

not	happen	again.”

It	 took	 most	 of	 the	 day	 to	 move	 her	 surplus	 furniture	 to	 her	 condo.	 I	 set	 up Pearl’s	 TTY,	 telephone	 and	 doorbell	 flasher,	 caption	 decoder,	 and	 silent	 alarm clock.

Pearl	 made	 the	 bed,	 tucking	 the	 end	 of	 the	 sheets	 under	 the	 mattress	 in	 a perfect	45-degree	angle	at	each	corner.

“No	wrinkles,	like	at	school.”

I	lay	down	on	the	bed	to	test	Pearl’s	alarm	clock.

“A	 back	 massage	 instead	 of	 a	 bell	 to	 wake	 me	 up.	 I	 like	 it!	 Let’s	 eat	 at	 the Kamei	Sushi.”

As	we	walked	to	the	restaurant,	holding	hands,	a	panhandler	crossed	our	path.

“Spare	change?”

“We’re	deaf.	We	don’t	understand	you,”	Pearl	signed.

“Ears	like	shit—not	work,”	I	signed.

The	beggar	held	out	his	hand.	Pearl	and	I	shrugged	and	walked	off.

“Fucking	dummies!”	the	panhandler	shouted	behind	us.

In	the	restaurant,	I	told	Pearl	what	he	said,	and	we	burst	into	laughter.

Our	shared	telephone	line	turned	out	to	be	a	nuisance.	I	could	respond	to	hearing or	 TTY	 calls,	 but	 a	 hearing	 caller	 who	 called	 when	 I	 was	 out	 would	 hear	 only beeping	 tones,	 and	 Pearl	 would	 become	 annoyed	 picking	 up	 voice	 calls	 she couldn’t	answer.	She	worried	this	created	a	security	risk	because	hearing	callers would	learn	she	was	at	home	alone.

I	 bought	 an	 answering	 machine	 and	 put	 voice	 and	 TTY	 greetings	 into	 its outgoing	 cassette	 tape,	 which	 were	 played	 sequentially.	 “Please	 wait	 for	 the message	after	the	tones”	in	my	voice	was	followed	by	“Please	leave	a	message

for	Pearl”	in	TTY	tones	followed	by	“I	am	not	available	to	take	your	call	right now,	 so	 please	 leave	 me	 a	 message	 after	 the	 beep”	 in	 voice.	 A	 hearing	 caller would	 ignore	 the	 tones,	 and	 a	 deaf	 caller	 would	 ignore	 the	 voice.	 If	 Pearl	 was home	when	a	TTY	message	came	in,	she	could	see	the	text	in	the	TTY	and	take

the	call.	If	we	had	both	been	out	and	a	caller	had	left	a	message,	she	would	play it	 back	 when	 she	 returned.	 A	 TTY	 message	 appeared	 as	 text	 on	 the	 TTY,	 but when	 a	 voice	 message	 was	 played,	 her	 TTY	 screen	 displayed	 a	 blinking	 light; Pearl	would	then	put	her	hand	on	the	speaker	and	feel	the	vibration	to	confirm	it was	a	voice	message.

It	 worked	 great,	 and	 Pearl	 was	 impressed.	 I	 loved	 to	 find	 solutions	 like	 this for	her.

Pearl,	 Jeff,	 and	 I	 took	 scuba	 diving	 lessons	 from	 Jeff’s	 friend.	 Pearl	 easily mastered	 the	 theory	 and	 pencil-and-paper	 calculation	 of	 the	 decompression tables.

My	face	mask	leaked,	so	our	instructor	suggested	I	shave	off	my	mustache	for

a	more	watertight	seal.	Pearl	agreed,	saying	it	made	me	look	gay.	I	shaved	it	off and	never	grew	one	again.

During	our	first	open	water	dive,	we	discovered	that	the	drysuit	Pearl	bought

from	Elizabeth	was	too	large,	so	it	trapped	air	and	Pearl	floated	like	a	balloon.

While	we	stood	in	chest-high	surf,	our	instructor	added	weights	to	her	belt	while Jeff	pressed	the	air	release	valve,	and	I	hugged	her	to	squeeze	the	air	out	of	her suit.	At	last,	Pearl	sank,	and	the	three	of	us	submerged	to	join	her	underwater.	As we	swam	into	deeper	water,	the	remaining	air	in	her	drysuit	shifted	to	her	boots.

Pearl	struggled	to	stay	level,	so	the	instructor	ordered	us	to	surface.

When	I	surfaced,	I	saw	two	neoprene	legs	and	fins	pointing	at	the	sky.	Pearl

was	 floating	 upside	 down,	 and	 her	 legs	 were	 beating	 helplessly	 in	 the	 air.	 Jeff, the	 instructor,	 and	 I	 took	 the	 regulators	 out	 of	 our	 mouths	 and	 howled	 with laughter.	The	three	of	us	inverted	Pearl	so	the	surplus	air	moved	to	her	shoulders, and	she	now	floated	upright.

“That’s	not	funny!”	Pearl	spat	out	seawater	with	a	grin.

“Bring	her	up	higher.	Inflate	her	suit	a	bit	more,”	the	instructor	said	to	me.

I	took	her	inflator	hose,	pressed	the	valve	open,	and	blew	a	lungful	of	air	into

her	suit.

Pearl	screamed.	“My	 tit! ”

I	had	forgotten	to	start	blowing	air	 before	I	opened	the	valve,	so	I	had	blown	a spoonful	 of	 cold	 seawater	 into	 her	 drysuit	 along	 with	 the	 air.	 We	 shared contagious	laughter	at	the	farce.	Pearl	was	a	good	sport.

I	looked	forward	to	every	day	I	spent	with	Pearl,	my	life	partner.	It	felt	like

my	early	years	with	Eugénie,	when	being	half	of	a	couple	had	been	as	important to	her	as	it	was	to	me.	I	hoped	our	happiness	would	continue	forever.





Guatemala	by	Motorcycle

Leo’s	 wedding,	 to	 a	 Mexican,	 was	 planned	 for	 September.	 I	 showed	 Pearl	 my map	of	Mexico.

“How	about	a	month	on	a	motorcycle?	You	will	need	a	hard	ass.”

“It	will	be	romantic.	But	I	only	get	three	weeks’	vacation.”

“I	can	leave	before	you	and	return	after	you.	I	can	reach	Mazatlán	in	four	or

five	days.	Then	you	fly	and	meet	me.	We’ll	ride	to	Tepic	and	stay	there	for	two

days	for	Leo’s	wedding.	From	there,	we	can	reach	Guatemala	in	a	week.”

“I	saw	on	TV	there	is	a	war	there.”

“The	war	is	in	the	jungle.	Tourists	on	the	highway	are	safe.	Is	there	a	sign	for

Guatemala?”	I	fingerspelled	Guatemala.

“Not	in	Canada.	Just	fingerspell	it.”

“Maybe	this?”	To	make	a	sign	for	Guatemala,	I	signed	the	sign	for	“nervous”

but	added	a	“G.”

Pearl	chuckled.	“Good—easy	to	remember!”

On	 departure	 day,	 I	 packed,	 put	 on	 my	 leathers	 and	 helmet,	 started	 the	 engine, and	signed.	“If	you	arrive	in	Mazatlán	and	I’m	not	there,	go	to	the	Holiday	Inn

and	wait	for	me.”

Pearl	nodded	nervously.	“I	am	happy	your	sister	will	stay	with	me	while	you

ride	to	Mazatlán	so	you	can	telephone	me	through	her.”

I	kissed	Pearl	goodbye	and	rode	off.

My	friend	Virgil’s	house,	just	beyond	the	Canadian-American	border,	was	my

first	stop.	My	bearded	friend	gave	me	a	gift	of	a	vial	of	cocaine.

“Two	grams.	Have	the	ride	of	your	life.”

I	started	the	engine.	Virgil,	a	motorcyclist	himself,	hugged	me;	we	knew	each

ride	might	be	our	last.	I	rode	off.	A	few	minutes	later,	I	pulled	over	and	snorted	a capful.

On	 the	 third	 afternoon,	 I	 reached	 Tucson.	 I	 rented	 a	 locker	 to	 cache	 my leathers,	warm	clothing,	and	camping	gear,	and	I	checked	into	a	motel.	After	two

nights	 of	 camping	 rough,	 it	 felt	 good	 to	 shower	 off	 3,000	 kilometers	 of	 dirt.	 I called	home	from	a	payphone.

“Nadine,	I’m	in	Tucson.	Tomorrow	I’ll	be	in	Mexico.	How’s	Pearl?”

“She’s	been	waiting	for	your	call.	She	says	she	loves	you.”

“Tell	 her	 I	 love	 her.	 The	 day	 after	 tomorrow,	 I’ll	 be	 in	 Mazatlán	 before	 her

plane	arrives.	She	doesn’t	have	to	worry.	I	won’t	phone	from	Mexico.	I	hope	you two	had	a	good	time.”

“I	 got	 writer’s	 cramp.	 I	 decided	 to	 take	 a	 sign	 language— beep! ”	 Our connection	dropped	as	the	payphone	money	ran	out.

I	rode	off	at	dawn	in	the	chilly	morning	desert	air.	Tucson’s	lights	shrank	in

the	mirrors	as	the	suburbs	and	farms	gave	way	to	sagebrush,	saguaro,	and	mesas.

I	 enjoyed	 some	 of	 the	 most	 vivid	 painted	 landscapes	 in	 the	 world	 on	 the	 way through	Calabasas	to	the	Mexican	border.	I	crossed	the	border	and	began	riding

to	 Mazatlán.	 On	 the	 two-lane	 road	 with	 no	 shoulders,	 disaster	 lurked	 around every	 corner:	 gravel,	 oil,	 potholes,	 livestock,	 dogs,	 trucks,	 and	 speed	 bumps.

Vultures	perched	on	roadside	carrion.

On	the	fifth	day,	I	passed	the	Tropic	of	Cancer	sign.	I	thought	of	the	photo	I

had	 taken	 of	 it	 with	 Eugénie,	 when	 I	 believed	 that	 we	 would	 ride	 together forever.

The	road	became	banked	by	cornfields,	like	riding	through	a	slot	in	a	maze.	I

rode	faster	to	be	sure	I’d	be	at	the	airport	before	Pearl	arrived.

I	almost	didn’t	arrive	at	all.

A	cow	walked	out	from	the	corn	and	stood	in	the	center	of	the	road.	My	tires

squealed	as	I	halted,	my	front	wheel	just	under	the	cow’s	belly.	It	bellowed	and

disappeared	 into	 the	 corn	 on	 the	 other	 side.	 I	 rode	 the	 last	 fifty	 kilometers	 at	 a snail’s	pace,	shaking.

Pearl	walked	into	the	arrival	hall.	She	carried	the	Samsonite	holding	our	formals for	 the	 wedding	 and	 a	 bag	 with	 her	 travel	 gear.	 She	 looked	 nervous	 and frightened,	 but	 when	 she	 saw	 me,	 the	 tension	 drained	 from	 her	 body,	 and	 she drooped	like	a	deflated	doll.	We	were	both	exhausted.

“I	was	worried.	Did	you	have	any	problems?”

“Only	a	cow.	Let’s	go.	Leo	and	Maria	must	be	waiting	for	us.”

We	walked	out	of	the	air-conditioned	terminal.

“My	God,	it’s	so	 hot! 	Your	bike	is	filthy.	Look	at	the	bugs	on	the	front!”

I	strapped	the	Samsonite	onto	the	rack.	Under	the	scorching	sun,	we	put	our

helmets	on	and	began	the	300-kilometer	ride	to	Tepic.	The	landscape	shimmered

in	the	heat,	and	mirages	floated	over	the	superheated	asphalt.	Up	a	hill,	a	black cloud	of	exhaust	fumes	blanketed	the	highway.	As	we	passed	through	the	smoke,

I	noticed	the	sign	on	the	back	of	the	truck	belching	it:	 Dios	permite	mi	regreso—

God	allows	my	return.

An	 hour	 later,	 we	 pulled	 into	 a	 Pemex	 station	 and,	 after	 refueling,	 ate	 in	 a roadside	café.	Flypaper	spiraled	down	from	the	ceiling	over	each	table.	Outside,

children	 pelted	 a	 piñata.	 There	 was	 no	 air-conditioning.	 For	 music,	 we	 could

drop	a	peso	into	a	Wurlitzer.

“I	 will	 show	 you	 Mexico.	 This	 is	 my	 fifth	 trip.”	 I	 pointed	 to	 the	 huevos rancheros	on	the	menu.	“Real	Mexican	food.”

A	girl	served	chillied	eggs,	refried	beans,	and	Bimbo	bread	on	stoneware.	She

laid	 a	 basket	 of	 tortillas	 wrapped	 in	 cloth	 on	 the	 red-and-white	 tablecloth	 and returned	with	mugs	of	steaming	milk.	I	scooped	a	teaspoon	of	Nescafé	into	each

mug.	Pearl	wiped	a	finger	on	her	arm,	showed	me	her	black	fingertip,	and	stuck

out	her	tongue.

“We	will	be	dirty	every	day,”	I	signed.

“You	went	far	in	five	days.”

“They	were	long	days,	but	Virgil	gave	me	some	cocaine.”

“Motorcycle	riding	makes	me	want	to	pee.”

I	 handed	 Pearl	 some	 tissue	 and	 pointed	 to	 a	 door.	 She	 came	 back	 a	 few minutes	later.

“It	 stinks! 	 I	 couldn’t	 sit.	 My	 legs	 are	 tired	 from	 squatting.	 Mexican	 woman must	get	constipated.”

“Never!	Mexican	food	prevents	constipation.”

We	 laughed.	 All	 eyes	 in	 the	 café	 followed	 our	 signing	 as	 we	 walked	 to	 the motorcycle	for	the	final	run	to	Tepic.

As	we	parked	at	the	Hotel	Fray	Junipero	Serra,	I	looked	up	to	see	McGuire,

Leo’s	colleague,	sitting	behind	a	window	and	drinking	Tecate	beer.

“When	did	you	get	in?”	I	shouted.

“Yesterday!	I’ve	been	to	Maria’s	already.	They’re	waiting	for	you.	I’m	your

police	 escort	 to	 the	 pre-nuptial	 feast.	 Delouse	 yourselves.	 Call	 room	 314	 when you’re	done.	I’ll	try	to	be	drunk	by	then.”

Pearl	 and	 I	 showered	 and	 joined	 McGuire	 in	 a	 taxi	 to	 Maria’s.	 I	 interpreted between	 English	 and	 ASL,	 while	 Maria	 interpreted	 between	 Spanish	 and

English.	 Between	 drinks	 of	 brandy,	 beer,	 and	 Canadian	 Club,	 which	 Maria’s father	 thought	 wise	 to	 have	 on	 hand,	 there	 were	 questions	 about	 Canada, deafness,	and	motorcycles.	The	family	and	neighbors	filled	the	house	and	spilled

onto	the	sidewalk.

“¡Salud! ”	I	toasted	to	Maria’s	father.

“Salud,	dinero,	y	amor,”	he	replied.

“Y	el	tiempo	para	gustarlos,”	Maria	added.

“To	health,	money,	and	love,”	I	said,	“and	the	time	to	enjoy	them.”

Pearl	held	up	her	glass.	“I	have	all	four.”

In	 the	 morning,	 the	 five	 of	 us	 went	 to	 the	 beach.	 We	 sat	 on	 the	 sand	 in	 our bathing	suits.

Pearl	looked	at	McGuire’s	arm.	“A	tattoo,	not	like	a	cop.”

“McGuire’s	a	good	cop,	but	he	has	to	wear	a	long-sleeve	shirt,”	said	Leo.

McGuire	 pulled	 bottles	 of	 Dos	 Equis	 beer	 from	 the	 cooler	 and	 studied	 the labels.	 “No	 expiry	 date—we’d	 better	 test	 them.”	 He	 downed	 a	 bottle	 in	 one quaff.	“That	one	passed.”

“Let	me	test.”	Leo	drank	a	bottle	in	one	go.	“You	guys	better	test	some,	too.”

We	swam,	ate	a	picnic	lunch,	and	“tested”	the	rest	of	the	beer.

The	next	day,	we	put	on	our	formals	and	walked	to	the	cathedral.	Leo	handed

me	his	camera	and	asked	me	to	be	their	photographer.	He	was	married	to	Maria

in	 Spanish	 on	 11	 September,	 understanding	 neither	 the	 ceremony	 nor	 the

documents.	 The	 reception	 was	 happy	 and	 drunken.	 We	 sat	 at	 the	 head	 table	 as guests	 of	 honor.	 The	 guests	 pinned	 money	 on	 Leo’s	 and	 Maria’s	 clothes	 while we	danced	to	pop	and	mariachi	music.

The	sign	over	the	bar	reminded	us	 Después	de	el	Borracho	Viene	la	Cruda—

after	the	bender,	the	hangover	comes.

In	the	morning,	Pearl	and	I	stored	the	Samsonite	at	Maria’s,	bade	farewell,	and

headed	south.	We	rode	along	the	coast	through	Barra	de	Navidad	and	stopped	in

a	Playa	Azul	beachside	hotel.

We	swam,	beachcombed,	and	sat	on	our	towels	on	the	sand.	A	waiter	brought

us	margaritas.

“Five	hundred	kilometers	today.	Are	you	still	afraid?”

“No.	This	is	romantic.	Don’t	look—a	man	on	the	beach	is	watching.”

“Your	 radar	 is	 always	 scanning.	 Of	 course,	 he	 stares.	 He	 never	 sees	 sign language.”

“Did	you	come	here	before?”

“No.	Eugénie	and	I	turned	around	at	Puerto	Vallarta.”

“Do	you	still	think	about	Eugénie?”

“No.	 At	 first,	 it	 was	 hard.	 Remember	 when	 you	 were	 small,	 and	 you	 didn’t recognize	your	house	when	you	came	home	from	vacation?	I	felt	like	that	when

Eugénie	moved	out.”

“I	felt	like	that	when	I	came	home	from	boarding	school.”

The	man	on	the	beach	approached	us.	We	were	astonished	when	he	started	to

sign.

“I	don’t	understand,”	Pearl	signed.

I	 borrowed	 a	 pencil	 and	 paper	 from	 the	 waiter.	 The	 man	 wrote	 in	 Spanish,

“Good	afternoon.	Where	are	you	from?”

“Canada,”	I	said,	startling	the	man,	who	had	assumed	I	was	deaf.

“Are	you	going	to	Mexico	City?”	he	said	in	Spanish.

“Yes,	in	two	weeks	if	we	have	time,”	I	said	in	Spanish,	then	signed.

“There	 is	 a	 deaf	 café	 in	 Mexico	 City.	 Everyone	 there	 understands	 sign language.	It’s	near	the	Palace	of	Fine	Arts.	I	recommend	it.”

Pearl	was	excited.	“Wonderful!	We	will	look	for	it.”

“Will	you	visit	my	village?	I	invite	you.”

“No,	we	can’t,”	signed	Pearl.

“Sorry,”	I	said	in	Spanish.

He	bade	us	farewell	and	walked	away.

“He	was	disappointed.	I	wanted	to	go.”

“He	will	ask	for	money	or	steal	the	motorcycle.”

We	started	early	every	morning	because	a	late	start	would	mean	a	short	day,	and

we	had	to	avoid	riding	at	night.	The	roadside	crucifixes	where	drivers	had	died

were	reminders	of	the	risks	we	took.	We	stayed	no	more	than	one	night	in	each

town.	 The	 BMW	 attracted	 attention	 everywhere,	 as	 if	 we	 were	 a	 parade.	 Pearl amused	herself	by	waving	to	children,	and	I	often	heard	her	laughing.

We	 rode	 to	 Acapulco,	 to	 a	 resort	 on	 the	 beach.	 As	 soon	 as	 we	 spread	 our towel	on	the	sand,	hawkers	swarmed	around	us	to	sell	 serapes,	towels,	sandals, time-share	condominiums,	and	marijuana.

“I	feel	like	I	am	meat,	and	they	are	flies,”	Pearl	signed.

“They	bother	hearies	and	deafies	exactly	the	same.”

She	grinned.	“Here,	we	are	equal.	There	were	so	many	children	on	the	road

today.	My	arms	are	tired	from	waving.	I	want	to	wave	at	every	kid	who	waves	at

me.”

A	ragged	girl	followed	us	as	we	walked	around	the	town,	begging	in	English,

Spanish,	 and	 German.	 I	 interpreted,	 but	 I	 didn’t	 look	 at	 her.	 Each	 time	 she touched	us,	we	swatted	her	hand	away.

Finally,	Pearl	could	take	no	more.	“What	do	you	want?”	I	did	not	interpret.

The	girl	held	out	her	hand,	palm	up,	with	an	irresistible	smile.	I	put	a	coin	in

it.	She	walked	away,	thinking	we	were	deaf.

“You	should	not	give	money,”	Pearl	signed.

“She	may	be	beaten	if	she	gets	nothing.	It’s	just	a	peso.	Let’s	have	dinner	and

eat	well	here.	This	is	our	last	beach	stop	for	a	while.”

In	Oaxaca,	we	were	stopped	at	a	military	checkpoint.	“Pasaporte,”	demanded	an officer.	He	thumbed	through	our	passports	and	asked	me	if	we	had	guns.	I	said

no.	We	would	be	stopped	at	checkpoints	every	two	hours	for	the	next	four	days.

The	state	of	Chiapas	seemed	like	another	country.	We	entered	the	rainforest.

Women	 with	 naked	 breasts	 walked	 on	 the	 shoulder	 carrying	 infants	 in	 cloth slings;	men	whetted	 machetes	on	curbs;	farmers	tilled	fields	with	oxen.

Pearl	 tapped	 my	 leg	 and	 signed,	 “Pee.”	 I	 saw	 a	 café	 and	 pulled	 over.	 She handed	me	her	helmet	and	walked	inside.	When	she	walked	out	a	few	minutes

later,	a	woman’s	head	peered	out	the	door	behind	her.	A	man’s	head	poked	out

above	it,	followed	by	a	child’s	head	below	it.	Three	heads,	stacked	like	a	totem

pole,	stared.

Pearl	 was	 angry.	 “Stupid!	 I	 looked	 for	 a	 baño	 sign.	 Nothing,	 so	 I	 went	 like this.”	Pearl	squatted	and	pointed	to	her	crotch.	“They	stared,	so	I	did	this.”	She pointed	 to	 her	 buttocks	 and	 bent	 forward.	 “They	 stared	 more.	 So	 I	 did	 this.”

Pearl	pantomimed	pulling	down	her	pants.	“I	must	pee	now!”

I	 refueled	 so	 Pearl	 could	 use	 a	 gas	 station	 toilet.	 She	 ran	 back	 retching	 and crying.	“I	will	have	nightmares!”

She	 guarded	 the	 bike	 while	 I	 went	 to	 the	 toilet.	 The	 bowl	 was	 filled	 with yellow	worms	squirming	in	stinking	brown	feces.

Light	traffic	in	the	rural	areas	made	riding	pleasant,	and	every	night	we	talked

about	the	sights	we	had	seen.	Four	days	later,	we	arrived	in	Tapachula,	near	the

Guatemala	border.	At	dinner	in	the	café,	the	wireless	motorcycle	alarm	sounded.

I	went	outside	to	investigate.

I	 signed,	 “A	 man	 was	 wiping	 the	 motorcycle	 with	 a	 rag.	 He	 wanted	 to	 earn some	money,	but	he	triggered	the	alarm.	I	told	him	to	stop.”

“He	was	testing	the	alarm.”

“That	is	impossible	because	he	didn’t	know	it	 had	an	alarm.”

“Then	he	was	testing	to	see	 if	it	had	an	alarm.”

In	 the	 morning,	 we	 arrived	 at	 the	 frontier,	 completed	 the	 formalities,	 and	 rode into	Guatemala.	Guatemala	was	exquisite—green,	mountainous,	misty,	and	cool.

Peasants	 walked	 along	 the	 shoulder	 wearing	 brightly	 colored	 serapes.	 We stopped	 at	 Quetzaltenango,	 at	 2,300	 meters,	 and	 checked	 in	 to	 the	 Pension Bonifaz,	the	best	hotel	in	town.

“Here,	with	your	black	hair	and	brown	eyes,	you	look	Spanish.	You	are	not

nervous	anymore.”

Pearl	smiled.	“We	can	invent	a	new	sign	for	Guatemala	without	‘nervous’	in

it.	When	are	you	going	to	take	photos?	I	want	to	show	my	friends.”

“I	 have	 a	 thousand	 photos	 I	 never	 look	 at.	 You	 can’t	 capture	 life	 with	 a camera.”

“When	did	you	stop	taking	photos?”

I	thought	a	moment.	“After	Eugénie	left	me.”

“You	don’t	take	photos	because	you	think	I	will	leave	someday.”

“Show	me	how	to	use	your	camera.	Mine	was	stolen	from	my	car.”

“A	Minox	is	not	automatic.	It	is	difficult	to	use.”

“Eugénie	used	it	on	the	nude	beach.”

“Eugénie	read	the	instruction	manual.”

We	walked	around	the	cobblestoned	streets,	where	I	took	a	photo	for	Pearl.	I

bought	machetes	for	my	brother	and	me.	We	ate	dinner	on	starched	white	linen

in	the	hotel’s	dining	room,	our	most	elegant	meal	of	the	trip.

“Order	anything.”

“I	can’t	read	the	menu,	so	I’ll	point	to	the	most	expensive	item.”

The	 next	 day,	 it	 was	 pouring	 rain.	 We	 put	 on	 all	 our	 clothing	 and	 rain	 gear.

The	 winding	 road	 stopped	 at	 a	 crumpled	 mass	 of	 girders	 lying	 in	 a	 river.	 The wreckage	 was	 guarded	 by	 soldiers,	 and	 a	 checkpoint	 preceded	 the	 detour.	 We handed	our	passports	to	the	officer.

“You	may	proceed,”	he	said	in	perfect	English.

We	rode	down	a	track.	Pearl	dismounted	and	forded	the	river,	balancing	with

outstretched	arms.	Water	poured	into	her	boots.	On	the	other	side,	she	sat	on	a

rock	and	poured	the	water	out	of	her	boots.	I	forded	the	river	cautiously.	Vapor

hissed	 from	 the	 engine	 as	 water	 splashed	 onto	 it.	 At	 mid-stream,	 the	 mufflers submerged,	 and	 gurgles	 replaced	 the	 exhaust	 beat.	 When	 I	 reached	 Pearl,	 I remained	seated	with	my	soaking	wet	feet	on	the	ground.	I	raced	the	engine	to

dry	it.

“What	happened	to	the	bridge?”	Pearl	signed,	wringing	water	from	her	socks.

“The	rebels	blew	it	up.”

“Why	does	the	army	guard	the	bridge	 after	it’s	gone?”

“Maybe	soldiers	 were	guarding	it,	but	the	rebels	blew	them	up,	too.”

We	 continued	 to	 Lake	 Atitlan,	 shivering	 in	 the	 drizzle,	 and	 stopped	 at	 the viewpoint	at	the	edge	of	the	volcanic	caldera.	“Here,	we	turn	around.	This	view

is	famous,	but	all	we	see	is	fog.”

“No	photo?”

“Of	what—clouds?”

I	regret	not	having	taken	more	photos,	but	we	were	living	in	the	moment;	to

have	taken	out	a	camera	would	have	cast	the	shadow	of	the	future.	This	I	could

not	explain	to	Pearl.

We	 continued	 to	 Huehuetenango.	 We	 peeled	 off	 our	 riding	 gear	 under	 the yellow	 light	 of	 a	 bulb	 dangling	 from	 the	 motel	 ceiling,	 and	 showered	 in	 cold water.	The	lights	went	out.

Pearl	lit	the	candles	that	were	provided	in	the	room.

“My	panties	turned	blue	from	the	jeans’	dye.	I	felt	like	I	was	sitting	on	a	wet

diaper.”

“My	toes	turned	brown	from	the	boots.	No	heat	tonight	means	we	will	wear

wet	clothes	tomorrow.”

We	walked	around	the	gloomy	town	in	our	rain	gear.	We	soon	returned	to	the motel	café.	A	generator	hummed.

I	translated	the	menu.	“Red	stew	with	gray	sauce	or	gray	stew	with	red	sauce,

and	everything	with	tortillas.	Did	you	notice	we	haven’t	gone	over	any	bridge	in

Guatemala?	All	of	them	are	blown	up.”

We	returned	to	Mexico;	we	had	 salud,	dinero,	y	amor,	but	never	enough	 tiempo.

In	 Campeche,	 the	 shadows	 of	 the	 mountains	 fooled	 us,	 and	 twilight	 fell	 before we	 could	 reach	 a	 city.	 We	 rode	 slowly,	 avoiding	 potholes,	 children	 selling armadillos,	and	unlit	carts,	until	we	came	to	a	cinder-block	building	with	the	sign CUARTOS.	We	rode	into	the	compound.

Dim	 light	 spilled	 out	 a	 door,	 along	 with	 laughter	 and	 tobacco	 smoke.	 Pearl guarded	 the	 bike	 while	 I	 walked	 inside	 and	 asked	 for	 a	 room.	 The	 proprietress led	me	to	a	windowless	cell	whose	steel	door	opened	into	the	cantina.	The	door

and	 walls	 were	 painted	 blue.	 A	 fluorescent	 tube	 hung	 from	 a	 humming	 ballast transformer	on	the	ceiling.	The	room	had	a	metal	bed,	a	thin	mattress,	a	blanket, a	sink	with	cold	water,	a	pipe	mounted	on	the	wall	of	the	room,	and	a	drain	in	the floor.	It	smelled	of	urine.

“Are	there	towels?”

“We	have	no	towels.”

“Where	can	we	park	the	motorcycle?”

“Inside.	We	will	watch	it	for	you.”

The	proprietress	dragged	chairs	aside	to	clear	a	path.	To	the	amusement	of	the

patrons,	Pearl	and	I	pushed	the	BMW	up	a	step	and	rolled	it	inside	the	cantina	to our	 room	 door.	 We	 sat	 at	 a	 table	 next	 to	 the	 motorcycle,	 now	 the	 cantina’s centerpiece,	and	ate	eggs,	beans,	and	tortillas.

A	woman	approached	us.	“Buenas	noches.	My	family	has	lived	here	for	three

generations.	Where	are	you	from?”	she	said	in	Spanish.

“Ask	about	the	bridge	destroyers,”	Pearl	signed.

“Las	 guerrillas? ”	 said	 the	 woman.	 “Sometimes,	 they	 ask	 for	 a	 cow.	 If	 not, then	 this—.”	 She	 drew	 her	 thumb	 across	 her	 throat.	 “Guerrillas	 want	 food	 and money.	Police	want	only	money.	We	pay	both	sides.”

We	washed	in	cold	water	and	dried	using	our	dirty	clothes.

The	next	day,	we	rode	to	Chetumal,	near	the	Belize	border,	where	we	found	a

real	motel.

In	the	morning,	we	crossed	into	Belize	and	rode	south	on	the	dusty,	washboarded

Northern	Highway.	We	passed	through	Orange	Walk	and	reached	Belize	City	at

midday.	 I	 went	 inside	 a	 bank	 to	 change	 a	 traveler’s	 check	 while	 Pearl	 guarded

the	bike.	When	I	returned,	she	was	terrified,	surrounded	by	a	crowd	of	curious onlookers	who	had	rarely	seen	a	motorcycle	like	ours.	We	rode	slowly	through

the	crowd,	riding	several	blocks	before	stopping	at	Moe’s	Café	for	turtle	soup.

“Why	did	you	leave	me?	You	should	have	guarded	the	bike	while	I	went	into

the	bank,	not	left	me	outside	by	myself!”

“Only	 the	 person	 who	 bought	 the	 traveler’s	 checks	 can	 cash	 them.	 I	 was terrified,	too,	to	ride	through	all	those	people!”

We	 looked	 for	 a	 hotel,	 but	 there	 were	 no	 vacancies.	 It	 took	 four	 hours	 to return	 to	 the	 Mexican	 border,	 where	 Pearl	 seemed	 unnerved	 by	 how	 easily	 I bribed	the	immigration	officers	to	admit	us	without	visas.

We	rode	to	Akumal,	on	the	Mayan	Riviera,	for	our	fondest	memories	of	the	trip.

We	snorkeled	in	the	blue	lagoon	at	Xel-Há	and	visited	the	Tulúm	pyramids,	and

for	two	days,	we	rented	scuba	equipment	and	dived	in	the	Caribbean.	Pearl	liked

the	resorts	we	stayed	in,	and	she	loved	the	swimming	and	diving.	We	weren’t	yet

certified	divers,	but	that	didn’t	matter	in	Mexico.	The	water	was	clear	and	warm.

And,	with	no	gloves,	underwater	conversation	was	easy—diving	was	an	activity

where	most	hearies	were	handicapped	because	they	could	not	converse	at	all.

Pearl	 saw	 a	 football-sized	 conch	 on	 the	 seabed	 and	 picked	 it	 up.	 The

divemaster	 took	 a	 flotation	 balloon	 from	 her	 vest,	 put	 the	 conch	 in	 its	 net,	 and inflated	 the	 balloon—conservation	 had	 not	 yet	 come	 to	 Mexico.	 When	 we

surfaced,	 the	 balloon	 was	 floating	 on	 the	 waves.	 The	 diving	 boat	 collected	 us and	the	balloon.

“I	didn’t	see	it,”	I	signed.

Pearl	smiled.	“Hearies	look,	but	they	do	not	see.”

“You	keep	the	shell,	but	we	keep	the	meat,”	said	the	divemaster.	“If	we	don’t

take	him	out,	he’ll	stink	when	he	dies.”

The	 next	 morning,	 we	 collected	 the	 two-kilogram	 shell	 and	 strapped	 it	 onto the	motorcycle.	The	highway	that	day	became	a	construction	site,	where	trucks

and	buses	peppered	us	with	gravel	bullets.	Because	of	the	road	delays,	we	found

ourselves	 riding	 in	 the	 dark	 that	 night	 and	 in	 a	 rainstorm—lethal	 riding conditions.	It	was	hard	to	see	potholes,	toads,	turtles,	roadkill,	wagons,	and	unlit cars,	 but	 whenever	 I	 slowed	 down,	 trucks	 passed	 us,	 spraying	 dirty	 water	 and making	it	even	harder	to	see.	Pearl	held	on	tightly.	By	sharing	these	adventures, we	felt	closer	than	ever	before.	We	arrived	in	Mérida	wet,	filthy,	and	exhausted.

A	 few	 days	 later,	 via	 Chichén	 Itzá	 and	 Palenque,	 we	 reached	 Mexico	 City	 in search	of	the	deaf	café,	and	we	crawled	through	the	traffic	of	the	world’s	second-largest	city,	second	only	to	Tokyo	at	that	time.	We	fended	off	vendors	who	tried

to	 sell	 us	 one	 lit	 cigarette	 or	 wipe	 the	 windshield	 with	 a	 dirty	 rag.	 We	 reached Constitution	Plaza	and	searched	the	side	streets	for	the	deaf	café.	We	stopped	at shops.	We	stopped	at	the	tourist	office.	No	one	knew	of	a	deaf	café.	Exasperated, I	parked	in	front	of	the	Palace	of	Fine	Arts.

“There	is	no	deaf	café.”

“Thank	you	for	trying.”

“Do	you	want	to	see	the	famous	Folklore	Ballet?	It’s	here.”

“Yes.	I	like	to	watch	dancing	because	I	can	see	the	music.”

We	were	lucky	to	get	tickets	for	the	next	show.	Pearl	was	floating	on	air	when

we	emerged	two	hours	later.	“I	never	saw	anything	like	that	show.	The	costumes

were	beautiful.”

“This	is	where	I	met	my	pen-pal	from	Madrid.”

“You	never	saw	her	again?”

“No.	We	write.	She	corrects	my	Spanish.”

A	 few	 days	 later,	 we	 reached	 Tepic,	 collected	 the	 Samsonite,	 and	 rode	 to Mazatlán.	Pearl	flew	home,	carrying	her	conch.

An	 hour	 later,	 I	 had	 a	 flat	 tire.	 We	 had	 been	 lucky:	 if	 the	 puncture	 had happened	that	morning,	Pearl	could	have	missed	her	flight.	As	I	repaired	it,	my

sweat	 dripping	 on	 the	 tire,	 I	 wondered	 what	 Pearl	 was	 thinking	 about	 her	 first trip	 with	 a	 hearing	 man,	 on	 a	 motorcycle,	 and	 to	 Latin	 America.	 We	 had	 no cellphones,	ATMs,	GPS,	or	Internet . 	Pearl	had	been	brave.

It	took	me	four	days	to	ride	home	to	Pearl,	stopping	in	Tucson	to	replace	the

tires	and	retrieve	my	cache.	The	15,000	km	ride	had	taken	a	month.





The	End	of	the	World

Our	 life	 settled	 into	 a	 routine	 of	 short	 commutes,	 long	 evenings,	 self-improvement	 classes,	 restaurant	 dining,	 watching	 subtitled	 films,	 reading,	 and paying	off	the	credit	card	balance,	which	had	ballooned	during	our	trip.	Pearl’s

conch	 was	 displayed	 in	 our	 living	 room.	 We	 completed	 our	 open	 water	 diving course,	but	our	instructor	refused	to	certify	Jeff	and	me	because	we	weren’t	good swimmers.

Virgil	came	to	visit,	and	he	and	Pearl	met	for	the	first	time.	After	Pearl	made

Red	 Zinger	 tea,	 Virgil	 took	 a	 leather	 pouch	 out	 of	 his	 pocket.	 He	 took	 out	 a mirror,	a	silver	tube,	a	screen,	a	razor	blade,	and	a	vial	and	slid	them	across	the table	to	Pearl.

“Cocaine.	Have	you	tried	it?”

“No.	I	smoked	pot.	I	can	try	some	for	the	experience.”

Virgil	arranged	a	capful	of	powder	into	six	lines	with	the	blade	and	slid	the

mirror	 to	 Pearl,	 who	 slid	 it	 to	 me.	 I	 picked	 up	 the	 tube,	 snorted	 a	 line	 in	 each nostril,	and	gave	it	to	Pearl.	She	copied	me,	smiled,	and	wiggled	her	head.

Virgil	snorted	the	other	two	lines.	“From	Bogotá.	Uncut.”

We	told	Virgil	about	our	trip.

“I’m	 mad	 at	 Derrick	 for	 not	 taking	 more	 pictures.	 Always	 rushing!	 Never enough	time.”

“True,	because	not	enough	money	to	have	enough	time.”

“Then	the	next	time	you	ride	south,	I’ll	arrange	for	you	to	buy	half	a	kilo	for

twenty	thousand.	I’ll	sell	it	for	thirty-five	thousand,	and	we’ll	split	the	profit.”

“You’re	kidding!”

He	grinned.	“I’m	kidding.	I	never	mix	money	and	friendship.”

“Derrick	showed	me	photos	of	your	property.”

I	 had	 told	 Pearl	 about	 Snowslide,	 the	 home	 Virgil	 shared	 with	 Rhea,	 many times.	His	house	was	on	the	other	side	of	a	river	and	could	not	be	seen	from	the

road.	His	cablecar	was	the	only	way	to	reach	it.	When	visiting,	arranged	by	mail

because	there	was	no	telephone,	I	would	park	next	to	his	cablecar	platform	and

honk	the	horn.	Fifteen	minutes	later,	I	would	see	the	cablecar	rolling	toward	me

like	a	flying	surfboard	as	Virgil’s	legs	cranked	its	pedals.	I	would	climb	on,	and we	would	roll	back,	five	stories	above	the	river,	to	the	cablecar	platform	on	the other	side.	From	there,	it	was	a	short	walk	to	his	house	in	the	forest.	I	can	still taste	 the	 freshness	 of	 the	 air	 over	 the	 river.	 Ever	 since	 my	 first	 visit	 six	 years

before,	 when	 Virgil	 lived	 in	 a	 cabin	 lit	 by	 kerosene	 lamps,	 I	 had	 dreamed	 of living	 on	 land	 like	 that.	 Virgil	 replaced	 his	 cabin	 with	 a	 two-story	 house	 when Rhea	joined	him.	I	loved	it	there,	and	I	visited	often.

“Snowslide	is	our	playground.	We	cut	our	wood	and	heat	our	own	house.	We

dam	 our	 creek	 and	 make	 our	 own	 power.	 We	 make	 our	 own	 mistakes,	 and	 we make	a	lot	of	love.	A	thousand	feet	of	cable	keeps	it	private.	We	got	everything

we	need	and	nothing	we	don’t	need.	Derrick	checked	for	me,	with	his	detector.”

“What	do	you	mean—‘checked	with	his	detector?’”

“Virgil	was	afraid	the	police	had	hidden	a	microphone	in	his	house,	so	I	made

a	radio	detector.	Virgil	brought	me	to	his	friend’s	place	to	check	his	house,	too.”

“Why	was	his	friend	worried?”

“Because	he’s	a	marijuana	farmer.”

“If	you	want	to	live	a	country	life,	you’ll	have	to	decide	while	you’re	young

and	strong.	You	got	the	brains.	You	just	need	the	chutzpah	and	a	dog.”

I	sighed.	“I	need	money.	You	need	to	be	rich	to	avoid	the	madding	crowd.”

“How	to	live	without	a	job?”	Pearl	signed.

“You	 work	 for	 a	 bank—figure	 it	 out.	 You	 two	 are	 lucky	 to	 live	 in	 Canada, where	there	is	plenty	of	land.”

When	we	told	Virgil	that	our	diving	instructor	refused	to	certify	me,	he	said,

“I’ll	certify	you	both.	I	need	a	few	students	every	year	to	maintain	my	instructor certification.	You	give	me	the	fee,	and	I’ll	mail	you	the	forms.	My	name	will	be

on	them	as	a	memento	of	the	dives	we	never	made.”

That	 was	 how	 Pearl	 and	 I	 became	 certified	 divers—certified	 by	 Virgil,	 who never	saw	us	dive.

While	 I	 waited	 for	 the	 bus	 in	 the	 autumn	 rain,	 wearing	 a	 suit	 and	 overcoat,	 a woman	 tapped	 my	 elbow.	 She	 offered	 me	 a	 card	 with	 a	 jade-colored	 plastic talisman	 hanging	 from	 a	 key	 chain.	 The	 manual	 alphabet	 was	 printed	 on	 the card.

“Are	you	deaf?”	I	signed.

“Yes,”	she	signed,	surprised.

“Why	are	you	selling	this?”

“I	have	no	job.”

“Where	are	you	from?”

“Toronto.”

“How	long	have	you	been	in	Vancouver?”

“Three	months.	Why	can	you	sign?”

“Because	my	girlfriend	is	deaf.”

When	I	came	home,	for	a	joke,	I	opened	the	door,	turned	the	light	off	and	on,

and	 stood	 in	 the	 hall	 as	 we	 had	 done	 at	 Elizabeth’s.	 I	 heard	 a	 click	 as	 Pearl locked	the	door.	I	unlocked	it	and	walked	in.

Pearl	was	furious.	“Why	did	you	do	that?”

“A	joke.	Don’t	deafies	make	jokes?”

“Never	do	that	again!	How	can	I	know	if	a	man	is	hiding	here?	Put	a	viewer

in	your	door!	A	chain	is	not	enough.”

“Sure.	My	joke	was	useful:	you	discovered	my	door	has	no	viewer.”

While	we	ate	dinner,	I	told	Pearl	about	my	bus-stop	conversation.

“She	 should	 not	 sell	 those	 sign-language	 cards.	 She	 is	 begging!	 It	 makes hearies	 look	 down	 on	 deafies.	 Vancouver	 deafies	 hate	 it	 when	 Toronto	 deafies come	here	and	sell	those	cards.	If	we	see	her,	we	will	take	her	cards	away,	but	if a	man	is	selling	them,	we	will	hurt	him.	If	you	see	her,	tell	her	what	I	said.”

Again,	Pearl	had	talked	about	violence	toward	men,	but	this	time	toward	deaf

men.	I	gave	her	the	newspaper.	“Read	this.	A	man	without	arms	wears	his	watch

on	his	leg.	He	uses	his	feet	to	write	and	play	the	trombone.	He	visits	schools	to teach	kids	not	to	stare	at	handicapped	people.	Do	deafies	visit	schools	to	teach

kids	not	to	stare	at	ASL?”

Pearl	read	the	article.	“No,	but	 Sesame	Street	sometimes	shows	ASL.”

“Then	write	to	the	newspaper	so	hearies	can	hear	a	deaf	story,	too.”

“I	will.	Then	you	check	my	English.”

After	 dinner,	 Pearl	 wrote	 slowly,	 thinking	 about	 every	 word.	 She	 gave	 her draft	 to	 me.	 I	 only	 changed	 one	 word:	 fullyfilled	 to	 fulfilled.	 Her	 letter	 was published	on	29	November	1984.

Editor,	Vancouver	Sun,	Sir:

The	Starers	Have	Real	Problem

I	have	been	deaf	since	I	was	born,	so	I	read	with	great	interest	the	article	on your	 Sunday	 Kids	 Point	 page	 headlined	 ‘Better	 Armed	 than	 People	 Think’, which	was	devoted	to	letters	from	pupils	at	a	Burnaby	school	who	had	been	paid a	visit	by	armless	Alvin	Law,	who	works	for	the	Abilities	Council.

One	 of	 the	 children	 who	 wrote	 pointed	 out	 that	 Law	 dislikes	 the	 words crippled,	 handicapped,	 and	 disabled.	 I	 agree	 with	 him	 that	 it	 is	 not	 he	 but	 the people	who	stare	at	him	who	have	a	problem.

During	my	childhood	I	thought	normal	people	had	no	problem	because	they

easily	 communicated	 with	 others.	 By	 the	 time	 I	 was	 20	 I	 realized	 that	 many	 of them	had	a	problem	worse	than	mine!

All	 of	 my	 life	 I	 have	 been	 able	 to	 use	 sign	 language	 to	 communicate	 with deafies,	so	to	me	it	is	the	‘normal’	people	who	keep	staring	at	us	who	have	the real	problem.

I	am	no	different	from	normal	people	except	I	don’t	use	my	ears	and	voice	to communicate.	I	 can	 speak	words—they	sound	muddy,	but	they	are	clear	enough, I	think.

It	is	the	people	who	stare	at	me	when	I	use	a	pen	and	paper	to	write	to	them

or	when	I	speak	slowly	to	them	who	obviously	have	a	problem,	not	me.	My	life	is fulfilled.

Pearl

I	was	smitten	by	Pearl.	Instead	of	saving	my	money	for	the	future,	I	bought	her	a diamond	ring	and	invited	her	to	A	Kettle	of	Fish,	the	best	seafood	restaurant	in

town,	to	give	it	to	her.

“Do	you	know	why	we’re	here?”	I	signed,	after	the	waiter	poured	Canadian

champagne.	“Four	reasons.”

“Christmas?”

“That’s	one.”

“Birthday?	This	is	my	first	birthday	since	we	met.”

“That’s	two.”

“To	 have	 dinner	 and	 talk	 about	 the	 year?”	 She	 blew	 a	 kiss.	 “Much	 has happened.	Moving	in,	riding	to	Guatemala,	diving	lessons,	signing,	and	so	on.	It

has	been	a	wonderful	year.	I	love	my	feelings.”

“Yes,	the	third	reason.”

“When	my	feelings	are	strong,	I	dream.”

“Dream	about	what?”

“A	family,	of	course.	I’m	a	woman.	What	do	you	dream	about?”

“A	house	with	land,	of	course.	I’m	a	man.”

“A	family	needs	a	house,	and	a	house	needs	a	family.”

“I	calculated	how	much	we	can	afford:	about	$100,000.”

“Land	is	important	for	kids	to	grow	up	with	a	garden	and	animals.”

“Maybe	our	parents	could	help	us	with	a	down	payment.”

“Mother	 refused	 to	 help	 when	 I	 bought	 my	 condo	 because	 her	 first	 down payment	went	to	my	husband	when	we	divorced.”

“You	are	the	sweetest	and	most	interesting	woman	I	ever	met.”

Pearl	smiled.	“Also	among	hearing	women?”

“I	love	your	mind,	and	the	rest,	too.	Do	you	think	we	are	a	good	pair?”

Pearl	nodded.	“We	are	living	happily.	I	believe	the	man	must	be	here,	and	the

woman	must	be	here.”	She	held	her	hands	face	down,	one	above	the	other,	and

moved	them	in	horizontal	circles.	“This	doesn’t	work.”	She	held	her	hands	at	the

same	level	and	bumped	them	together	to	show	conflict.	I	want	to	be	with	you.”

I	gave	her	a	little	box.	“Then	you	will	need	this.”

Pearl	opened	it.	“A	ring!”

“Try	it	on.”

Pearl	put	the	ring	on	her	ring	finger,	past	her	chewed-off	fingernails.	“It	fits.

How	did	you	know	my	size?”

“Because	you	tried	on	my	engineer’s	ring,	the	one	I	never	wear.”

“Does	this	mean	we	are	engaged?”

“Not	yet	because	I’m	still	married.	But	that’s	what	I	want.”

“You	are	confused.	Are	we	engaged	or	not?”

“We	are	engaged	to	be	married	if	you	accept	my	proposal.”

“This	is	your	fourth	reason.	When	can	you	divorce?”

“After	three	years	of	separation,	so	in	two	years.	Or	immediately,	if	either	of

us	can	prove	adultery.	Eugénie	wants	a	quick	divorce,	but	she	can’t	get	her	lover to	sign	an	adultery	affidavit	because	his	wife	will	find	out	he’s	cheating.”

“If	I	give	you	proof	of	adultery,	can	you	divorce	Eugénie?”

“Yes.”

“I	will	support	your	divorce. Pearl	King	signs	like	this.”	She	signed	my	name sign	 but	 substituted	 “P”	 for	 “D.”	 “I’m	 so	 happy,	 I	 want	 to	 shout,	 but	 I	 know	 I shouldn’t	 do	 that	 here.	 I	 want	 to	 live	 with	 you	 in	 a	 house	 with	 children	 and	 a garden	 and	 pets,	 not	 in	 an	 apartment.”	 Pearl	 couldn’t	 stop	 smiling,	 beaming, even	glowing.

“I	 want	 a	 hobby	 farm	 if	 we	 can	 afford	 it.	 Then	 we	 can	 enjoy	 the	 country lifestyle	and	make	extra	money.	But	now	it	is	a	dream.”

“If	we	dream	together,	our	dreams	will	come	true.	If	we	make	extra	money,

we	can	live	on	your	salary	after	we	have	children.”

“I	hope	we	can	find	a	place	that	we	can	afford	that	can	help	support	us.	But	if

we’re	too	far	from	the	city,	we’ll	spend	too	much	time	commuting	to	work	the

land.”

“We	need	an	apartment	in	the	city	for	working	and	a	house	in	the	country	for

living.”	Pearl	leaned	her	chin	on	her	wrist	and	looked	at	the	diamond	and	white

gold	on	her	finger.	She	walked	around	the	table	and	kissed	me.	“It’s	perfect.”

“Some	 people	 think	 that	 because	 you	 are	 deaf,	 you	 must	 be	 poor,	 but	 they won’t	think	so	when	you	flash	 that	in	front	of	their	noses.”

“Can	you	afford	this?”

“I	used	all	my	savings.	This	is	from	my	heart.”

A	 week	 later,	 Pearl	 signed	 Eugénie’s	 divorce	 petition	 as	 my	 adulteress, clearing	the	way	for	us	to	marry.

We	 attended	 the	 Greater	 Vancouver	 Association	 of	 the	 Deaf’s	 New	 Year’s	 Eve party.	 The	 community	 hall	 parking	 lot	 was	 packed.	 Music	 pounded	 out	 of	 the

building.	Before	we	got	out	of	her	car,	Pearl	told	me	how	to	behave.

“Don’t	complain	about	the	music.	Deafies	need	to	 feel	music	to	enjoy.	Don’t forget	to	look	straight	at	a	Deafie	when	he	signs.	You	have	a	habit	of	wandering

your	eyes	to	glance	at	people	that	walk	by,	especially	girls.”

A	 greeter	 took	 our	 tickets	 at	 the	 door.	 The	 hall	 was	 festooned	 with	 banners and	balloons.	The	hall	wasn’t	dark	because	that	would	have	made	it	hard	to	sign.

The	 dance	 floor	 was	 ringed	 by	 tables	 of	 partygoers	 who	 signed	 furiously, laughed,	 and	 sometimes	 shouted	 incoherently	 above	 the	 Robert	 Palmer	 disco music.	 Beer,	 wine,	 and	 soft	 drinks	 were	 passed	 around	 in	 plastic	 tumblers.	 A mirror	ball	spun	overhead,	but	the	dance	floor	was	empty.

“I	see	a	few	hearing	aids.	Can	you	hear	the	music	without	yours?”

“I	feel	it	through	my	feet	and	here.”	Pearl	put	her	hand	on	her	chest.

A	rolled-up	napkin	bounced	off	my	face.	We	turned	to	see	a	man	sitting	with

a	group	of	women.

Pearl	waved	to	them.	“That	is	René.	This	is	my	fiancé,	Derrick.”

“Deafie	or	hearie?”	signed	René.

“Hearie,”	I	signed.	I	caught	a	look	of	disapproval	on	the	faces	of	some	men	at

another	table,	who,	of	course,	could	read	our	signs	anywhere	in	the	room.

“Hold	my	purse.”	Pearl	began	signing	native	ASL,	incomprehensible	to	me.

I	 bought	 wine	 for	 her	 and	 stood	 at	 the	 side	 of	 the	 hall,	 drinking	 beer	 and surveying	 the	 young	 adults	 united	 by	 language	 and	 discrimination.	 I	 was	 an outsider,	but	until	I	spoke	or	signed,	I	looked	like	them.	Conversations	often	took place	 among	 people	 several	 tables	 apart,	 so	 it	 was	 a	 challenge	 to	 see	 who	 was talking	 to	 whom.	 As	 the	 hall	 became	 crowded,	 people	 rearranged	 themselves when	their	lines	of	sight	were	broken.	There	were,	no	doubt,	other	hearies	there, but	I	had	no	way	of	spotting	hearies	who	were	skilled	in	ASL,	and	as	long	as	I

was	 incommunicado,	 there	 was	 no	 way	 other	 hearies	 could	 spot	 me.	 This	 was the	reverse	of	how	Pearl	lived	in	the	hearing	world.

An	attractive	woman	signed	something	to	me	in	native	ASL.

“Please	sign	more	slowly.”

“You	are	so	tall	that	I	can	see	the	hairs	inside	your	nose.”

I	laughed.	“You	have	wonderful	eyes.”

She	smiled.

After	 a	 speech	 in	 ASL	 from	 an	 emcee,	 a	 band	 played	 Brown	 Sugar	 by	 the Rolling	 Stones.	 The	 music	 was	 amplified	 to	 the	 threshold	 of	 pain	 for	 hearing ears.	 The	 audience	 streamed	 onto	 the	 dance	 floor.	 As	 the	 band	 segued	 into	 the Beach	 Boys’	 “Good	 Vibrations,”	 the	 tempo	 slowed	 down,	 but	 some	 dancers

didn’t	slow	down.	I	felt	angry	to	notice	some	musicians	snickering	at	them.

“Jodi	and	Jeff	are	here,”	Pearl	signed.	We	sat	down	together.

“No	 need	 to	 shout.	 We	 can	 sign	 all	 night	 and	 not	 get	 sore	 throats,”	 Jeff fingerspelled.

“Sign	language	is	perfect	for	discos.	Where	is	Gavin?”

“At	a	family	reunion.	Gavin	told	me	you	two	got	engaged.	Congratulations!”

Jeff’s	 fingerspelling	 was	 slow,	 like	 watching	 a	 telegram	 spool	 out	 of	 a teleprinter.	Pearl	showed	Jeff	her	engagement	ring	and	hugged	him.

Jodi	 and	 Pearl	 switched	 to	 ASL,	 so	 Jeff	 and	 I	 switched	 to	 shouting	 at	 each other.	We	got	sore	throats,	after	all.

“You’re	a	lucky	man!	Pearl	will	be	loyal	to	you	provided	she	knows	you	are

loyal	to	her.	You’ll	need	to	be	sensitive	to	her	culture.	She’s	a	deafie!”

“She’s	told	me	about	deaf	culture,	and	I’ve	read	about	it,	but	I	still	don’t	see

how	there	can	be	a	‘deaf	culture’	any	more	than	a	‘blind	culture’	…	a	subculture, maybe.”

“It	 exists	 because	 of	 ASL.	 It’s	 like	 an	 onion.	 In	 the	 core	 are	 deafies	 and people	who	have	always	been	around	deafies—their	family	is	deaf,	they	went	to

deaf	schools,	they	had	deafie	friends,	they	live	in	the	deaf	community.	They	see

deafness	as	a	language	barrier.	Out	from	the	center,	you	get	more	communication

with	hearies	until	you	get	to	the	skin	of	the	onion—friends	of	deaf	people	who

don’t	know	how	to	sign.	Just	under	the	skin,	you	have	the	hard-of-hearing	like

Jodi.”

“Where’s	Pearl	in	the	onion?”

“Near	 the	 center,	 but	 she	 tries	 to	 move	 out.	 Her	 friends	 are	 in	 the	 center, except	Jodi.	Each	layer	tries	to	help	the	layer	farther	in,	but	the	deeper	you	go, the	more	they	believe	that	there	are	no	layers!

The	band	played	louder.	Jeff	bought	a	beer	for	me	and	two	tumblers	of	wine

for	 himself,	 and	 we	 walked	 to	 a	 fire	 exit	 where	 a	 few	 other	 hearies	 had congregated,	far	from	the	loudspeakers.	The	band	played	YMCA.	The	audience

held	 up	 arms,	 wiggled	 hands,	 howled,	 and	 waved	 napkins	 in	 applause	 as	 the musicians	took	a	bow.	The	recorded	music	resumed.

“Are	you	planning	to	buy	a	house?”	shouted	Jeff.

“We’d	like	to,	but	we	can’t	afford	it	yet.”

“Let	 me	 help—I’m	 an	 agent.	 The	 countryside	 is	 the	 place	 for	 you.	 ‘Be

prepared,’	as	the	Boy	Scouts	say.”

“Be	prepared	for	what?”

“Teotwawki—The	 End	 of	 the	 World	 as	 We	 Know	 It.	 I’m	 convinced	 we’re

coming	 to	 the	 end	 of	 the	 longest	 period	 of	 peace	 in	 history.	 Read	 Life	 After Doomsday	if	you	don’t	believe	me.”

“Your	view	is	extreme.”

“Hedging	does	no	harm.	We	are	sitting	ducks.”

“For	what?”

“Terrorism,	 social	 collapse,	 the	 Bomb;	 it’s	 a	 matter	 of	 time.	 If	 you	 buy	 a house	half	an	hour	from	town,	you’ll	be	at	the	periphery	of	a	one-megaton	blast

and	out	of	range	of	third-degree	burns.	You’d	get	a	half-minute	warning	between

seeing	 the	 flash	 and	 being	 hit	 by	 the	 blast—that’s	 enough	 time	 to	 get	 to	 your basement.	 Our	 westerly	 winds	 would	 spread	 the	 fallout	 eastward,	 so	 west	 or north	is	where	you	want	to	buy	your	house,	and	on	the	lee	side	of	a	hill.”

Jeff’s	thinking	may	sound	fanatical	today,	but	it	was	only	eccentric	during	the

Cold	War.

Pearl	walked	over,	with	Jodi.	“Why	are	you	standing	so	far	away?”

I	realized	that	speaking	at	a	deaf	party	was	like	having	a	secret	conversation.

“Sorry.	It’s	too	loud	over	there.”

“Come.	It’s	midnight	soon—time	for	the	awards.”

While	 recorded	 disco	 music	 blared,	 the	 emcee	 presented	 awards	 in	 ASL.

Volunteers	passed	out	sparkling	wine	in	plastic	flute	glasses.	The	music	stopped

while	 the	 emcee	 counted	 down	 the	 seconds	 to	 midnight	 in	 ASL.	 Then	 “Auld Lang	Syne”	thundered	through	the	hall	as	everyone	hugged	and	danced.

Part	II:	Partners	in	Adventure





Bowen	Island

“Is	this	Derrick	King?	This	is	the	British	Columbia	Institute	of	Technology,”	said a	 female	 voice	 on	 the	 telephone.	 “Your	 students	 have	 been	 sitting	 in	 the classroom	for	half	an	hour.	Why	aren’t	you	here?”

I	 laughed,	 and	 Pearl	 stared	 at	 me.	 “Because	 no	 one	 asked	 me	 to	 teach!	 It’s been	two	years	since	I	heard	from	you.	How	much	are	you	paying?”

“We’re	 paying	 $3,000.	 Tuesday	 and	 Thursday	 nights,	 15	 January	 until	 26

March.	That’s	$150	a	night.”

“Fine,	but	I	can’t	start	tonight.	Tell	the	students	your	administration	screwed

up	and	to	go	home.”

“Come	early	on	Thursday.	See	me,	and	we’ll	sort	out	the	details.”

“See	 you	 then.”	 I	 hung	 up.	 “Wonderful	 news!”	 I	 explained	 the	 background.

“And	because	this	will	be	my	second	time	teaching	International	Trade	Finance,

it	won’t	be	as	much	work	to	prepare.	We’ll	have	$3,000	for	a	down	payment!”

I	 brought	 some	 newspapers	 and	 real	 estate	 magazines	 home.	 I	 unrolled	 a topographic	and	signed,	“Let’s	find	a	place	to	live.”

“We	are	 here,”	Pearl	signed.	She	put	her	finger	on	the	map.

I	nodded.	I	drew	a	line	along	the	USA	border.	“We	can’t	go	south.”

“Right.	What	about	the	east?”

“I	don’t	want	to	travel	for	more	than	an	hour	to	work.	One	hour	is	about	fifty

kilometers.”	I	drew	an	arc	fifty	kilometers	to	the	east	on	the	map.

“That’s	in	New	Westminster.	I’ll	never	live	there	again.”

“Let’s	look	west.	The	limit	is	the	sea.”	I	drew	a	line	along	the	shoreline.

“What	about	the	north?”

“North	 is	 the	 mountains.	 The	 limit	 is	 the	 altitude.”	 I	 put	 my	 finger	 on	 a contour	line.	“The	highest	road	is	at	700	meters,	so	that’s	our	limit.”	I	traced	the contour	 line	 to	 the	 north,	 joining	 the	 arc,	 the	 US	 border,	 and	 the	 shoreline	 to enclose	an	irregular	area	around	Vancouver.

“Everywhere	 is	 city.”	 Pearl	 stared	 at	 the	 map.	 “Living	 in	 the	 country	 and working	in	Vancouver	is	impossible!”

“We	should	have	bought	land	a	hundred	years	ago.”

We	browsed	real	estate	advertisements	while	we	ate	dinner.

“We	can’t	afford	anything	nice,”	Pearl	signed.	She	slid	the	 Buy	and	Sell	Press across	 to	 me.	 “Look!	 A	 four-hectare	 and	 an	 eight-hectare	 lot.	 Cheap.	 Where	 is

Bowen	Island?”

We	 looked	 at	 the	 map.	 Bowen	 Island,	 ten	 kilometers	 long	 with	 three	 paved roads,	 stood	 outside	 the	 line	 I	 had	 drawn.	 “Perhaps	 our	 limit	 should	 be	 the distance	we	can	travel	on	a	 boat	in	an	hour.”	I	telephoned	BC	Ferries	to	find	out about	the	ferries	to	nearby	islands.	“Bowen	is	the	only	commutable	island.	There

are	ferries	every	two	hours.	They	take	twenty	minutes	to	reach	West	Vancouver.

Then	a	bus	takes	forty	minutes	to	go	downtown.”

“Very	interesting.	Let’s	go	see	those	lots.”

I	 telephoned	 the	 vendor	 and	 then	 signed,	 “I	 have	 the	 directions.	 The	 owner won’t	come	because	he	doesn’t	live	on	the	island.	But	one	of	my	customers	lives

there.	I’m	sure	he’ll	show	us	around.”	I	called	Rokus,	then	signed,	“He	said	to

bring	our	boots	on	Sunday.	We’re	invited	for	a	tour	and	dinner!”

I	stopped	the	car	at	the	Bowen	Island	ferry	tollbooth	in	Horseshoe	Bay.

“Ask	for	a	discount,”	signed	Pearl.

“How	much	is	the	handicapped	discount?”

“Fifty	percent,”	said	the	woman	in	the	tollbooth.

Pearl	smiled.	“Sometimes,	it	is	good	to	be	handicapped.”

The	Howe	Sound	Queen	arrived.	We	drove	onto	its	deck	and	forward	to	the

chain	 gate	 stretched	 across	 its	 bow.	 After	 the	 other	 cars	 boarded,	 the	 ferry juddered	into	beautiful	Howe	Sound,	leaving	a	wake	of	parallel	white	lines	on	a

canvas	of	deep	green	velvet	ringed	by	snow-capped	peaks.	We	climbed	out	and

leaned	against	the	ship’s	rail.	The	sweet	winter	air	blew	through	our	clothes,	so we	climbed	back	inside	the	car,	content	to	view	the	stunning	scenery	through	a

windshield.	 As	 the	 ferry	 approached	 the	 Snug	 Cove	 dock,	 foam	 spumed	 as	 the forward	propellers	guided	the	ferry	into	the	creosoted	wooden	slip.	We	drove	off

to	the	smell	of	salt	air	and	seaweed,	and	we	passed	geese	grazing	on	the	shoulder under	arbutus	and	western	red	cedar	trees.

We	drove	uphill	past	the	Snuggler	Inn,	General	Store,	gas	station,	and	a	few

craft	 shops	 and	 turned	 at	 the	 intersection.	 The	 pavement	 became	 gravel.	 Ten minutes	 later,	 we	 passed	 through	 a	 gate.	 A	 dog	 ran	 after	 the	 car	 as	 we	 drove beside	the	fence	surrounding	a	vegetable	garden.	On	the	other	side	of	the	garden, ducks	paddled	in	a	pond.	We	drove	past	a	shed,	a	greenhouse,	and	a	rabbit	hutch

and	halted	in	front	of	a	double-wide	mobile	home.	A	propane	tank	stood	next	to

the	hitch.	Blue	smoke	drifted	out	of	the	steel	chimney	poking	out	the	end	of	the

trailer.

A	couple	walked	out	onto	a	wooden	deck	and	welcomed	us.	We	removed	our

hiking	boots	and	sat	around	the	woodstove.	A	boy	and	a	girl	were	curled	up	in

the	corner.

“Rokus	and	Jenny,	it’s	good	to	see	you	again	and	to	introduce	you	to	Pearl.

So	this	is	the	bank’s	collateral!	How	do	you	like	living	here?”

“We	love	it,”	Rokus	said.	“Bowen	Island	is	suburbanizing,	but	the	ferry	and

gravel	 road	 keep	 out	 the	 riffraff.	 We	 have	 no	 TV.	 We	 love	 nature,	 privacy, friends,	and	doing	things	ourselves.	We’re	not	homesteaders	who	eat	fresh	meat

in	autumn,	salt	meat	in	winter,	and	beans	in	spring;	we’re	do-it-yourselfers	with a	freezer	and	microwave.”

“Why	do	you	have	a	kerosene	lamp?”	signed	Pearl.

“For	 when	 the	 power	 goes	 out.	 But	 that’s	 all	 right.	 We	 don’t	 really	 need power.	 The	 woodstove	 is	 the	 center	 of	 our	 home.	 A	 stove	 mimics	 the	 seasons: spring	while	the	fire	builds,	summer	during	the	burn,	and	autumn	as	the	embers

fade.	Winter,	too,	if	we	haven’t	put	in	enough	wood.”

“Pearl’s	 a	 country	 girl.	 We’d	 love	 to	 be	 partly	 self-sufficient	 but	 keep	 our jobs.”

“Your	 land	 is	 not	 going	 to	 save	 you	 money	 except	 on	 heat	 if	 you	 cut	 your own	firewood.”

“It	costs	us	more	to	raise	rabbits	and	chickens	than	to	buy	them	in	the	store.

We	do	it	because	it’s	fun,	and	they	taste	better,”	said	Jenny.

“There	are	other	ways	to	make	money	on	a	homestead.	Hobby	farmers	deduct

farm	losses	from	their	other	income.	They	don’t	make	money,	but	they	pay	less

tax,”	said	Rokus.

“Are	you	safe	here?”	signed	Pearl.

“We	don’t	lock	our	doors,”	said	Jenny.	“Hitchhiking	is	safe.	There’s	no	bus	or

taxi,	so	the	first	car	to	pass	will	usually	give	you	a	lift.	We’re	a	community.	Kids grow	 up	 with	 mink,	 ravens,	 eagles,	 owls,	 cormorants,	 and	 deer.	 Bowen	 Island has	the	highest	per-capita	child	population	in	Canada.”

“Fifteen	 years	 ago,	 the	 population	 was	 600.	 Now	 we	 have	 2,000	 in	 winter, 3,000	in	summer,”	said	Rokus.	“Doctors,	lawyers,	butchers,	bakers,	and	hippies.

Fifteen	 years	 ago,	 you	 could	 put	 a	 cottage	 on	 ten	 acres	 for	 $30,000.	 No	 more!

And	 no	 more	 trailers.	 Now	 you	 have	 to	 build	 a	 real	 house,	 and	 few	 good acreages	are	for	sale.	The	lots	you	came	to	see	are	so	bad	that	agents	won’t	touch them—that’s	why	you	found	them	in	the	free	listings.	I’ll	show	you	why.”

Rokus	and	his	dog	led	Pearl	and	me	to	his	Suzuki	jeep.	While	he	dribbled	a

can	of	oil	into	the	engine,	he	pointed	at	the	power	line	beside	his	property.	“For decades,	 the	 neighbors	 on	 the	 other	 side	 of	 that	 ridge	 had	 only	 kerosene, propane,	 and	 a	 generator	 for	 power.	 I	 sold	 them	 a	 right-of-way	 after	 I	 got	 my power.	 When	 their	 power	 was	 installed,	 it	 was	 as	 if	 they’d	 arrived	 in	 the twentieth	century	overnight.”

We	 climbed	 into	 Rokus’s	 jeep,	 which	 rattled	 down	 the	 lane,	 spewing	 blue

smoke.	 Rokus	 drove	 us	 to	 another	 gravel	 road.	 We	 followed	 it	 for	 twenty minutes	before	stopping	at	a	forested	slope	behind	a	sign:	 For	Sale	by	Owner.

“The	 four-hectare	 lot	 is	 a	 strip	 straight	 up	 the	 hill,	 eighty	 meters	 wide	 and maybe	half	a	kilometer	long,	too	steep	for	a	road.	All	you	can	do	with	this	lot	is build	a	house	by	the	road.	It’s	dark	and	cold	because	the	north	end	of	the	island doesn’t	get	much	sunshine.”

We	 drove	 to	 the	 eight-hectare	 lot.	 Another	 gravel	 road	 led	 to	 muddy	 tire tracks	 pressed	 into	 waist-high	 weeds.	 Rokus	 shifted	 into	 four-wheel	 drive.	 He stopped	as	the	tracks	faded	into	the	bush,	and	we	could	drive	no	farther.

“No	sunlight	here.	See	those	cedars?	They	thrive	in	swamps.	See	the	bracket

fungus	on	those	alders?	It	also	loves	swamps.	You’d	never	be	able	to	drive	the

damp	out	of	a	house	here.	You	couldn’t	even	 build	a	house	here—you	couldn’t get	a	building	permit	because	there	is	no	road.”

Pearl	and	I	looked	at	each	other	in	despair.

“Do	you	know	any	other	places?”	I	signed	and	said.

“I	know	another	property,	the	Thaxter	place,	on	the	other	side	of	this	hill.	It’s been	for	sale	for	years,	down	to	about	$100,000.”

We	 left	 the	 Suzuki	 and	 walked	 until	 we	 reached	 a	 clearing.	 In	 it	 stood	 the skeleton	of	a	two-story	house.	Plastic	hung	from	window	openings,	flapping	in

the	 breeze.	 The	 house	 was	 impressive,	 the	 location	 ideal.	 Pearl	 and	 I	 stared	 at each	other.

“There	is	a	driveway	to	the	trunk	road.	The	roof	shakes	were	split	from	cedar

trees	logged	on	this	property.	Bowen	Island	is	part	of	this	house.”

We	 walked	 through	 the	 house,	 our	 boots	 thundering	 on	 plywood.	 Piles	 of manure	 and	 scraps	 of	 lumber	 lay	 scattered	 inside.	 A	 chipped	 and	 dirty	 electric range	stood	in	the	corner.

“Boy	 Scouts	 put	 that	 there;	 they	 camped	 while	 the	 power	 was	 still	 on.	 The Thaxters	 inherited	 the	 land	 from	 Great-granddad,	 one	 of	 the	 settlers.	 They mortgaged	their	land	to	buy	construction	machinery,	but	interest	rates	went	sky

high	 in	 1981	 and	 wiped	 them	 out.	 Fran	 Thaxter	 lives	 on	 the	 other	 side	 of	 the trunk	road.”

“This	will	be	an	 amazing	house	in	the	future,”	signed	Pearl.

Rokus	led	us	up	the	hill	behind	the	house.	We	gazed	down	at	a	barn	and	two

horses	standing	in	an	unfenced	field.	The	barn	was	decorated	with	moose	antlers

and	antique	farm	tools.	I	felt	like	I	was	dreaming.

“Only	an	hour	from	Vancouver,	and	look	at	 this.”

We	walked	down	to	the	barn.

Pearl	 pointed	 at	 the	 sign	 over	 the	 door:	 DE	 MAL	 EN	 PIS.	 “What	 does	 that mean?”

“From	bad	to	worse.	It’s	a	curse.”

The	horses	followed	us	into	the	barn.	Rokus	opened	the	feed	room,	took	two

flakes	of	hay,	and	fed	one	to	each	horse.

“With	 four	 stalls,	 concrete	 floor,	 hayloft,	 and	 feed	 and	 tack	 rooms,	 this	 is surely	 one	 of	 the	 best	 barns	 on	 the	 island.	 And	 you	 can’t	 smell	 it	 from	 the house,”	Rokus	chuckled.

Rokus	led	us	down	a	path	winding	through	seven-story	fir	trees.	A	lake	came

into	view,	the	water	reflecting	the	trees	swaying	in	the	breeze	like	waving	hands.

Trout	breached,	sending	circular	waves	to	the	blue	herons	standing	on	the	shore

waiting	 for	 their	 chance	 to	 strike.	 Rokus	 scooped	 a	 handful	 of	 water	 into	 his mouth.	Pearl	and	I	stared	at	each	other,	dumbfounded,	as	if	everything	we	saw

was	too	good	to	be	true.

“This	 is	 the	 reservoir	 for	 the	 cove.	 Swimming	 isn’t	 allowed,	 but	 we	 do	 it.

Horses	aren’t	allowed	to	piss	in	it	either,	but	they	do	that,	too.	If	it	weren’t	for the	trees,	you	could	see	the	lake	from	the	house.”

We	could	see	that	this	was	a	project	waiting	to	reward	someone	with	health,

money,	 love,	 and	 the	 time	 to	 enjoy	 them.	 We’d	 fallen	 in	 love	 with	 each	 other, and	now	we	were	falling	in	love	with	Bowen	Island,	too.

We	drove	back	to	Rokus’s	home.	Pearl	played	with	the	children	while	Jenny

cooked	rabbit	casserole.

“If	 you	 join	 us	 on	 Bowen,”	 said	 Jenny,	 “you’ll	 love	 it	 because	 the	 happiest people	here	are	city	converts.	We	know	where	the	grass	is	greener.”

“The	city	converts	are	the	happiest	because	they	have	the	money	to	enjoy	it,”

said	Rokus.	“If	you	 start	here,	you	can’t	afford	to	 stay	here—it’s	the	country-city paradox.”

“It	makes	me	happy	to	see	that	land	by	the	lake,”	signed	Pearl.	“Derrick	and	I

have	a	lot	to	discuss.”

“Watch	 the	 time,”	 said	 Rokus.	 “If	 you	 don’t	 catch	 the	 nine	 o’clock	 ferry, you’ll	 have	 to	 sleep	 here.	 That’s	 another	 country-city	 paradox:	 the	 Bowen Islander	with	his	ferry	schedule.	Leisure	with	a	quartz	watch!”

Rokus	 used	 a	 flashlight	 to	 show	 us	 the	 way	 to	 our	 car.	 Because	 there	 was little	light	pollution,	thousands	of	stars	sparkled.	Pearl	had	grown	up	under	a	sky like	this.	To	me,	the	night	sky	was	stunning;	to	Pearl,	it	was	like	going	home.

Neither	 of	 us	 could	 stop	 thinking	 about	 that	 property.	 I	 called	 the	 agent	 who listed	it.	After	I	hung	up,	I	signed,	“It’s	$120,000.”

“Can	we	afford	it?”

“No.	Do	you	want	to	see	it	again?	We	have	nothing	to	lose.”

“Why	not?”	Pearl	grinned.

A	week	later,	the	agent,	Luisa,	met	us	at	the	ferry	terminal.	While	we	sat	in her	car	during	the	crossing,	she	showed	us	the	blueprints.

“The	 house	 is	 designed	 in	 two	 wings	 around	 a	 harvest	 kitchen.	 The	 master bedroom,	library,	and	living	room	are	in	one	wing.	Two	more	bedrooms	and	the

family	room	are	in	the	other	wing.”

“This	bathtub	will	be	wonderful	for	babies,”	signed	Pearl.

“That’s	a	hot	tub.”

“Fancy.”

“Yeah,	too	fancy.	Thaxter	ran	out	of	money.”

As	we	drove	up	the	driveway,	Luisa	pointed	at	the	fenced	garden.

“The	 septic	 field’s	 under	 the	 garden.	 To	 get	 a	 building	 permit,	 they	 first needed	to	‘prove	the	septic.’	All	the	permits	have	expired,	but	you	can	get	new

ones.	 For	 the	 septic	 permit,	 you	 dig	 a	 hole	 in	 the	 garden,	 pour	 in	 a	 bucket	 of water,	and	time	it	percolating	down.	Then	ignore	your	result,	and	write	the	legal requirement	on	the	form.	The	soil	is	rocky	here,	so	everybody	cheats.”

We	 parked	 at	 the	 house.	 Luisa	 led	 me	 around	 the	 house	 while	 Pearl	 walked around	the	property.

“Thaxter	started	out	first-class.	The	walls	are	fifty	percent	thicker	than	code,

and	 the	 shakes	 are	 triple-thick.	 When	 they	 ran	 out	 of	 money,	 they	 went	 cheap.

The	sheathing	is	quarter-inch	and	thinner	than	code—illegal,	in	fact.”

“How	much	would	it	cost	to	make	this	place	livable	so	we	could	move	here

and	finish	the	rest	ourselves	as	our	money	allowed?”

“Maybe	forty	grand.”

Pearl	returned.	“Look	at	this.”

Luisa	and	I	followed	Pearl	down	the	gravel	half	of	the	circular	driveway	to	a

pair	 of	 hemlock	 and	 alder	 trees	 spiraling	 around	 each	 other	 like	 a	 four-story DNA	helix.

Pearl	hugged	me.	“The	love	trees.”

“You	get	a	forest	and	a	lake.	Well,	the	lake	ain’t	yours,	but	it	might	as	well

be.	The	price	started	at	180	two	years	ago,	then	150	a	year	ago,	and	now	it’s	120.

You	 can	 get	 another	 appraiser	 to	 try	 to	 pull	 the	 price	 down	 some	 more.	 Call Chang’s	Appraisers,	and	tell	them	you	want	the	lowest	possible	valuation.	Then

put	in	an	offer.”

Pearl	and	I	studied	the	blueprints	and	made	a	budget.	“Can	we	afford	it?”	signed

Pearl.

“Barely,	 with	 both	 salaries,	 my	 night-school	 pay,	 a	 first	 mortgage,	 a	 second mortgage,	a	personal	loan,	and	a	loan	from	my	father.	But	$120,000	is	the	most

we	can	pay,	including	construction.”

Because	the	price	had	crashed	and	builders	had	little	work	in	1985,	we	 could afford	it—but	not	to	make	mistakes.

Pearl	grew	excited.	“What	if	we	rent	the	barn?	Grow	food?	Have	a	business?

I	 can	 sell	 my	 uncle’s	 jades.	 Deafies	 get	 a	 seventy-five	 percent	 handicapped discount	on	property	tax.”

“That	will	help	a	lot,	so	we	should	put	your	name	on	the	documents.”

“What	if	we	move	there	and	finish	the	house	ourselves?”

“We	 could	 never	 build	 a	 house	 there	 and	 work	 downtown	 at	 the	 same	 time.

We	 can’t	 live	 in	 a	 house	 without	 a	 permit.	 A	 permit	 follows	 inspection.	 The inspection	follows	water,	lights,	toilets,	and	septic.”

“What	if	we	pay	to	finish	part	of	the	house	and,	after	we	move	in,	finish	the

rest?”

I	drew	a	line	down	the	middle	of	the	plan.	“Interesting.	The	kitchen,	family

room,	two	bedrooms,	and	laundry	room	on	this	side	are	all	we	need.	I’ll	call	the

appraiser.	Then	we	need	construction	quotes	for	half	a	house.”

“Soon,	we	will	have	a	beautiful	home	with	a	big	garden	and	horses	and	farm

and	dogs	and	children	on	Bowen	Island.”

Chang’s	 appraisal	 was	 an	 almost-affordable	 $92,000.	 I	 made	 appointments

with	 two	 contractors	 and	 drove	 to	 Bowen	 Island.	 After	 I	 reached	 the	 house	 for the	first	appointment,	Ross,	who	was	our	nearest	neighbor,	wandered	up	the	trail

from	his	house.	I	gave	him	a	set	of	plans,	and	we	walked	around	the	house.

“About	$50,000	without	sundecks,”	said	Ross.

“We	can’t	afford	it.”	Then	I	gave	him	our	sketch	of	half	a	house.	“What	do

you	 think	 of	 this?	 You	 wall	 off	 and	 finish	 half	 of	 it,	 so	 I	 can	 finish	 the	 rest myself.	But	no	paint	and	no	carpet	for	now.	We	can	only	afford	$30,000.	What

can	you	do	for	that?”

“You’d	 be	 living	 in	 a	 construction	 site,	 but	 a	 lot	 of	 people	 here	 live	 in unfinished	 houses.	 Let	 me	 think	 about	 what	 I	 can	 do.	 I’ll	 get	 back	 to	 you	 next week.”

An	 hour	 later,	 Edmund	 arrived.	 I	 gave	 him	 a	 set	 of	 plans,	 and	 we	 walked around	the	house.	“Around	$70,000,”	he	said.

“We	 can	 only	 afford	 $30,000.”	 I	 gave	 him	 our	 sketch	 of	 half	 a	 house.	 “You wall	off	and	finish	half	of	it,	so	I	can	finish	the	rest	myself.	No	paint	and	carpet.

What	can	you	do	for	that?”

“Let	me	get	back	to	you—business	is	terrible.”

A	week	later,	I	received	quotes	from	Ross	for	$28,000	and	Edmund	for	$30,000

for	half-finished	houses.	Pearl	and	I	were	overjoyed.	We	offered	$90,000	for	the

unfinished	property.

While	 awaiting	 the	 outcome	 of	 the	 foreclosure	 court,	 I	 continued	 to	 work, teach,	and	study.	During	an	MBA	coffee	break,	I	mentioned	our	house	activity	to

a	classmate.

“Why	 don’t	 you	 ask	 Frank	 for	 advice?”	 he	 suggested.	 “He	 lives	 on	 Bowen.

He’s	an	architect.	He	must	know	the	builders	there.”

I	was	astonished.	“I	didn’t	know	Frank	lived	on	Bowen	Island!”

Frank	 was	 five	 or	 ten	 years	 older	 than	 me,	 well	 dressed,	 and	 reclusive.	 He barely	spoke	in	class,	and	we	had	rarely	spoken	to	one	another	even	though	our

class	had	just	twenty	students.	I	approached	him	for	advice.

“I	 heard	 you	 live	 on	 Bowen.	 How	 do	 you	 attend	 school	 while	 living	 on	 the island?	The	last	ferry	sails	before	our	class	ends.”

“I	 stay	 with	 my	 parents	 on	 class	 nights.	 Everyone	 on	 Bowen	 has	 an

arrangement	with	city	friends.	We	stay	with	them,	and	in	summer,	they	stay	with

us.”

The	 blueprints	 and	 quotes	 were	 in	 my	 briefcase,	 so	 I	 told	 Frank	 about	 the house	and	showed	him	the	plans	and	quotes.

“Which	of	these	quotes	would	you	choose?”

“Edmund	might	do	a	better	job,	but	your	neighbor,	Ross,	won’t	do	anything

poorly.”

A	week	later,	Frank	approached	me	after	class.

“I	 walked	 around	 the	 Thaxter	 place	 on	 the	 weekend.	 Hire	 me.	 I’ve	 finished two	houses	on	Bowen,	and	I’m	finishing	off	the	house	we	live	in.	My	son	and	I

work	more	cheaply	than	Ross	or	Edmund.	I	can	deduct	the	cost	of	materials	for

my	house	from	my	taxable	income	if	you	choose	the	same	materials.”

“How	 can	 you	 build	 my	 house	 while	 you	 work,	 study,	 and	 build	 your	 own house?”

“My	 son	 will	 work	 full	 time.	 I’ll	 work	 weekends	 and	 take	 two	 weeks’

vacation.	 My	 house	 can	 wait.	 Come	 to	 my	 place	 this	 weekend	 with	 your	 wife, and	see	for	yourself.	You’ll	like	our	materials.	In	the	meantime,	give	me	copies

of	your	plans	and	quotes.”

A	week	later,	Frank	handed	me	his	quotation	for	$24,000.

Pearl	and	I	visited	Frank	and	his	family	in	their	three-story	house.	The	upper

floors	 were	 finished	 and	 appeared	 to	 be	 of	 high	 quality.	 After	 the	 tour,	 Frank’s wife	 showed	 Pearl	 her	 antiques	 while	 I	 discussed	 insulation	 with	 Frank	 in	 his study.	On	our	way	home,	we	drove	past	Frank’s	previous	houses.

“Frank’s	house	was	beautiful,”	signed	Pearl.

“I	found	out	Frank	isn’t	a	registered	architect	even	though	he	said	he	works	as

one.	He	dropped	out	of	university.	He	only	admitted	it	when	I	didn’t	see	a	degree on	his	wall,	only	some	certificates.”

“Frank’s	 wife	 is	 sweet.	 We	 talked	 about	 kids	 and	 cooking.	 Frank	 is	 strange.

Most	hearies	move	their	hands	when	they	talk,	but	Frank	doesn’t	do	that.”

“If	Frank	can	build	us	a	house	that	looks	like	his	own	house	for	$4,000	less

than	 Ross,	 then	 we	 should	 take	 it.	 Even	 if	 he	 makes	 some	 mistakes,	 it	 will	 be cheaper.”

“How	can	you	be	sure	Frank	will	do	a	good	job?”

“He	lives	there,	so	he	can’t	afford	a	bad	reputation.”

“Ross	 and	 Edmund	 can’t	 afford	 a	 bad	 reputation	 because	 they	 don’t	 have another	 job.	 Frank	 has	 another	 job.	 He	 knows	 what	 he	 is	 doing,	 but	 we	 don’t know	what	he	is	doing.	But	you	decide.	You	know	more	than	I	do	about	houses.”

We	accepted	Frank’s	offer.	I	took	a	day	off	to	apply	for	the	septic	permit	in

Squamish,	 the	 building	 permit	 in	 Vancouver,	 and	 the	 electrical	 permit	 in Burnaby—the	departments	handling	Bowen	Island	were	150	km	apart.

Eugénie	 and	 I	 attended	 divorce	 court.	 The	 judge	 said	 he	 wished	 other	 couples were	 as	 cooperative.	 We	 had	 lunch	 together	 as	 singles,	 ten	 years	 after	 we	 first met.

Luisa	called	me	two	weeks	later,	hysterical.	“Fran’s	come	up	with	the	money

to	 call	 off	 the	 foreclosure!	 Our	 work	 is	 for	 nothing!	 The	 Thaxter	 property	 is jinxed! ”

The	house	was	sold	to	Pearl	and	me	on	27	February	1985;	Thaxter	had	been

bluffing.	 We	 were	 thrilled.	 Life	 was	 going	 our	 way!	 We	 would	 find	 happiness.

This	was	high	adventure,	and	we	were	on	a	roll.

Frank	 drafted	 a	 contract	 and	 gave	 two	 unsigned	 copies	 to	 me.	 The	 contract specified	 completion	 in	 two	 months.	 “Why	 is	 the	 contract	 with	 Astra	 Trading Company	Limited	and	with	a	Vancouver	post	office	box	address?”

“For	 taxes,	 to	 get	 the	 benefits	 we	 discussed.	 That’s	 my	 mailing	 address because	I	don’t	want	the	Bowen	Island	postmistress	reading	my	mail	in	her	spare

time.”

We	 signed	 Frank’s	 contract.	 Frank	 ordered	 materials	 and	 began	 work	 a	 few days	 later.	 Pearl	 traded	 her	 Buick	 Skyhawk	 in	 on	 a	 new	 blue	 Nissan	 pickup truck.	I	advertised	my	condominium	for	rent.

A	 semi-trailer	 load	 of	 drywall	 and	 materials	 arrived.	 Frank,	 his	 son,	 and	 his son’s	girlfriend	started	work.	They	wired	and	plumbed;	erected	windows,	siding,

vapor	barrier,	and	insulation;	installed	and	buried	the	septic	tank	and	connected it	to	the	septic	field;	and	cut,	nailed,	and	plastered	drywall.	The	power	company connected	electricity	to	the	temporary	pole,	and	the	telephone	company	hung	a

line	from	the	road.	A	mason	built	a	chimney.

Pearl	and	I	worked	at	our	jobs	downtown,	restless	and	distracted,	and	visited Bowen	Island	every	weekend.

“We	 are	 unmarried,	 so	 if	 either	 of	 us	 dies,	 the	 other	 will	 have	 a	 mess.	 We need	wills.	Do	you	know	a	signing	lawyer?”

“There	 is	 one	 deaf	 lawyer	 in	 Vancouver.	 I	 don’t	 want	 to	 use	 him	 because deafies	gossip.	I	know	a	hearie	lawyer	who	fingerspells,	Quinn.”

I	 was	 surprised	 that	 Pearl	 wouldn’t	 support	 a	 deaf	 lawyer,	 because	 she	 had spoken	about	becoming	an	investment	analyst	for	the	deaf	community.	We	had

Quinn	make	our	wills.

We	bought	work	clothes,	garden	tools,	a	stepladder,	kerosene	lanterns,	and	a

used	 refrigerator	 and	 woodstove.	 We	 hauled	 everything	 in	 our	 new	 truck.	 I connected	 the	 old	 electric	 range	 and	 the	 refrigerator	 to	 the	 temporary	 power.

Frank	 asked	 us	 not	 to	 be	 in	 the	 house	 while	 they	 were	 working,	 so	 while	 they worked	on	the	house,	we	cleared	the	property	and	barn	to	get	the	barn	ready	to

rent.

We	 ate	 our	 meals	 at	 the	 Snuggler	 Inn,	 warming	 ourselves	 by	 the	 fireplace.

Life	was	lived	slowly	there,	as	if	coffee	were	sold	by	the	hour,	not	by	the	cup.

The	linoleum	floor	was	more	faded	by	time	than	by	footsteps.

Pearl	 and	 I	 repaired	 the	 garden	 fence	 and	 gate.	 We	 cleared	 half	 a	 ton	 of manure	 from	 the	 barn	 and	 raked	 it	 into	 the	 garden.	 We	 collected	 the	 old construction	material	scattered	about	the	property,	recycling	what	we	could	and

burning	 the	 rest	 in	 bonfires.	 When	 the	 chimney	 masonry	 was	 dry,	 I	 started	 the stove	 so	 the	 drywall	 could	 dry.	 Our	 fatigue	 made	 us	 feel	 the	 progress	 in	 our bones	as	we	built	our	future	together.

Pearl	discovered	a	pipe	poking	up	through	the	soil	outside	the	barn.	I	probed

around	the	wellhead	and	found	the	other	end.	I	connected	the	pipe	so	that	when

Frank	 completed	 the	 plumbing,	 the	 barn	 would	 have	 running	 water,	 ready	 for horses.

We	advertised	in	the	 Undercurrent,	the	local	tabloid:

Barn	for	Rent.	Four	stalls,

tack	and	feed	rooms,

concrete	floor.	$150.

“Frank	 is	 a	 week	 behind	 schedule.	 He	 has	 run	 out	 of	 vacation.	 Now	 he	 only works	on	weekends,	but	someone	has	to	keep	the	fire	burning	to	keep	the	walls

drying.”

“I	can’t	delay	my	vacation—union	rules.	If	I	can’t	paint	in	June,	I	will	waste

my	vacation.”

“And	we	must	move	out	of	my	condo	before	my	tenant	arrives	at	the	end	of May.”

“Can	we	move	into	the	house	before	Frank	is	finished?”

“Frank	said	no.	Even	his	wife	called	to	convince	me	not	to	move	in	until	the

drywall	is	sanded.”

“We	can	wait	for	two	weeks	in	your	parents’	place.”

“What	about	our	stuff?	Haul	it	twice?”

“We	 can	 move	 our	 things	 to	 the	 unfinished	 side	 while	 we	 stay	 with	 your parents.	Elizabeth’s	son,	Kieran,	is	on	school	holidays.	We	can	hire	him	to	guard our	things	for	two	weeks	while	we	stay	with	your	parents.”

“Good	idea!”

Pearl	talked	to	Elizabeth	on	the	TTY	and	then	to	Kieran:

THIS	 IS	 A	 BIG	 ADVENTURE	 FOR	 YOU	 TO	 STAY	 ALONE	 YOU	 KEEP	 THE	 FIRE	 AND	 TAKE

YOUR	FOODS	FROM	FRIG	AND	HEAT	ON	ELECTRIC	STOVE	OUTSIDE	CAN	YOU	DO	THAT?

GA

COOL	GA

THERE	IS	NO	TV	YOU	WILL	BE	BORED	TELEPHONE	IS	LONG	DISTANCE	TO	HOME	SHORT

CALLS	ONLY	ARE	YOU	SURE	TO	STAY	ALONE	FOR	TWO	WEEKS?	GA

I	WANT	TO	DO	IT	IS	BOW	AND	ARROW	OK?	GA

YES	PERFECT	WE	WILL	PICK	YOU	UP	I	WILL	CALL	YOUR	MOM	TO	ARRANGE	SK

Pearl	showed	me	a	re-homing	notice	in	the	 Buy	and	Sell	Press	for	a	two-year-old German	 Shepherd.	 He	 could	 keep	 Kieran	 company.	 We	 drove	 to	 Coquitlam	 to meet	the	dog,	Whisky,	and	decided	to	adopt	him.	We	arranged	to	pick	him	up	on

the	day	we	brought	Kieran	and	our	goods	to	Bowen	Island.

On	the	way	home,	we	stopped	at	a	pet	shop	to	buy	supplies	for	Whisky.	We

left	the	shop	with	dog	supplies,	cat	supplies—and	a	kitten.

On	 moving	 day,	 two	 men	 from	 Bowen	 Freight	 came	 in	 their	 truck,	 loaded	 our goods,	 and	 left	 for	 Bowen	 Island.	 We	 put	 the	 kitten	 in	 our	 truck	 and	 went	 to collect	the	dog.	The	dog	was	limping	on	three	legs,	and	a	forepaw	was	wrapped

in	a	bloodstained	rag;	the	irresponsible	owner	thought	nothing	of	it.	We	took	him straight	to	a	veterinarian.	After	surgery,	he	lay	down	in	the	truck	with	a	plastic cone	 on	 his	 head	 and	 fell	 asleep.	 We	 picked	 up	 Kieran	 two	 hours	 later	 than expected	and	drove	to	Bowen.

Frank	and	his	son	were	plastering	when	we	arrived.	The	movers	had	finished

unloading	our	cartons	into	the	unfinished,	unheated,	unlit,	and	windowless	west

wing	and	were	now	unloading	the	bed,	piano,	kitchen	table,	and	houseplants	into

the	heated	and	dusty	east	wing	construction	site.	Pearl	took	care	of	the	kitten	and made	 the	 bed	 for	 Kieran,	 covering	 it	 with	 plastic.	 Kieran	 walked	 the	 crippled

dog.	I	hung	our	clothes	inside	plastic	bags	on	a	rod	over	the	bare	earth	basement floor.	 Whisky	 liked	 the	 kitten.	 At	 first,	 the	 kitten	 was	 terrified	 by	 the	 dog,	 but they	 quickly	 became	 friends.	 Rokus’s	 jeep	 sputtered	 up	 the	 driveway.	 Whisky yanked	the	leash	from	Kieran	and	chased	the	jeep,	barking	furiously	and	doing

his	best	to	be	a	guard	dog	while	running	on	three	legs	with	a	cone	on	his	head.

Rokus	 and	 Jenny	 stepped	 out	 of	 their	 jeep	 and	 greeted	 us,	 so	 Whisky	 stopped barking	and	greeted	them,	too.	They	welcomed	us	to	Bowen	Island	and	gave	us	a

frozen	rabbit.

I	 drove	 Kieran	 to	 the	 General	 Store.	 It	 had	 everything	 an	 islander	 needed, even	videotape	rentals,	and	prices	for	goods	other	than	ice	cream	were	not	much

higher	 than	 on	 the	 mainland.	 It	 had	 a	 butcher,	 who	 also	 butchered	 for	 deer hunters	and	hobby	farmers.	It	was	a	liquor	agency,	so,	unlike	all	liquor	stores	in Vancouver,	it	sold	both	cold	beer	and	groceries.

“You	can	have	anything	you	can	cook.	Frozen	pizzas?”

“With	cream	sodas	and	Oreos?”	said	Kieran.

“Sure.	And	some	mini-pack	cereals	with	plastic	spoons.”

“Ice	cream	bars?

“Sure.”

“Choice! 	Can	I	get	more	comics?	And	dog	biscuits?”

“Sure.	And	don’t	forget	toilet	paper.”

The	 woman	 in	 front	 of	 us	 bought	 groceries	 without	 paying	 for	 them.	 The cashier	 wrote	 the	 amount	 in	 a	 book,	 and	 on	 the	 wall	 behind	 her	 was	 a	 list	 of defaulters.	 I	 opened	 an	 account,	 so	 Kieran	 could	 walk	 to	 the	 store	 and	 get whatever	he	needed.

I	 taught	 Kieran	 how	 to	 tend	 the	 woodstove.	 Pearl	 held	 the	 flashlight	 in	 the windowless	basement.

“Tonight,	you	can	use	the	electric	lamp	on	a	cord,	but	Frank’s	using	it	right

now.	 We	 let	 the	 stove	 run	 down	 today	 so	 I	 can	 show	 you	 how	 to	 light	 it.	 Use paper,	 cedar	 kindling,	 sticks,	 split	 wood,	 and	 then	 a	 round	 of	 wood.	 When	 you do	it	right,	you	only	need	one	match.”	I	closed	the	stove,	lit	a	match,	and	pushed it	through	the	grate.	Fire	raced	across	the	paper.	In	a	few	minutes,	the	flue	pipe groaned	as	the	stove	came	to	life.	I	closed	the	grate	to	slow	the	burn.	“One	round at	a	time,	and	not	too	much	air.	Keep	it	burning,	but	don’t	let	it	get	too	hot.”

We	tied	Whisky	to	a	tree	and	drove	to	the	Snuggler	for	dinner.

“Tonight	you	will	be	the	first	to	sleep	alone	in	that	house.	Keep	Whisky	with

you,	enjoy	your	comics,	buy	more	at	the	store	if	you	want,	and	call	us	or	Rokus

or	the	police	if	you	have	a	problem.	You	can	walk	to	the	store	in	half	an	hour.”

“Ten	bucks	a	day!”

Pearl	hugged	Kieran.	“I	want	to	have	a	boy	like	you.”

When	we	returned	six	days	later,	Kieran	was	sitting	on	a	log,	whittling.	His	jeans were	streaked	with	drywall	dust.	We	walked	inside.	White	dust	was	banked	like

snowdrifts.

“How	was	it?”	signed	Pearl.

“No	one	came	except	Frank	and	his	son,	mostly	his	son.	Frank	told	me	to	stay

outside,	so	it	was	boring.	Except	for	the	deer!	I	never	saw	one	close	before!	The kitten	kept	pooping	in	the	houseplants,	so	they	stink.	Whisky	slept	with	me.	Can

I	go	home	now?”

“All	right.	Whisky	can	guard	now.”

“You’ll	 have	 to	 tie	 him	 up.	 He	 barks	 when	 Frank	 or	 his	 son	 come	 near.

Whisky	 hates	 them!”	 Kieran	 held	 his	 finger	 to	 his	 lip.	 “Look—Bambi’s	 back!

Hold	Whisky	and	watch.”	Kieran	stepped	out	the	door,	pulled	some	weeds,	and

approached	the	deer.	It	ate	from	Kieran’s	hand,	and	I	took	a	photo.

I	 had	 the	 photo	 framed,	 but	 Kieran	 would	 never	 see	 it	 because	 Pearl	 and Elizabeth	soon	parted	ways,	and	Pearl	refused	to	give	it	to	him.	I	began	to	notice her	relationships	were	unstable,	and	she	didn’t	care	if	others	suffered	while	she settled	a	score.

Pearl	 drove	 Kieran	 home,	 a	 four-hour	 round	 trip.	 I	 drove	 to	 the	 Bowen Building	Centre	to	rent	a	rototiller	and	began	tilling	the	garden	soil.

When	 Pearl	 returned,	 she	 and	 Whisky	 joined	 me	 in	 the	 garden.	 She	 was

laughing.	“I	discovered	why	Kieran	wanted	to	leave	early:	the	cookies	and	sodas

are	gone—and	the	outhouse	is	full	of	diarrhea!”

We	 pulled	 stones	 and	 weeds.	 Whisky	 started	 staggering,	 and	 then	 he

collapsed.	 I	 thought	 he	 was	 choking,	 so	 I	 held	 him	 upside	 down	 while	 Pearl squeezed	 his	 chest	 in	 a	 Heimlich	 maneuver.	 He	 was	 breathing,	 but	 he	 didn’t move.

Pearl	stroked	him	and	called	his	name;	it	sounded	like	“Eeh-ih.”

“What	was	he	chewing?”

Pearl	showed	me	the	stick	she	had	been	tossing.

“That’s	 foxglove—it’s	 poisonous!”	 I	 ran	 up	 the	 driveway,	 found	 some

charcoal	in	the	bonfire	ashes,	ran	back,	and	poked	the	charcoal	into	his	mouth.

We	dribbled	in	some	water.	Slowly,	he	recovered.

We	planted	vegetable	seeds	until	dusk.	Frank	and	his	son	were	still	working.

We	 drove	 to	 the	 Snuggler	 for	 dinner	 in	 our	 gumboots	 and	 overalls	 and	 did	 our best	to	wash	in	its	bathroom.	When	we	emerged	from	the	restaurant,	the	sky	was

a	blaze	of	stars.

When	we	drove	back,	we	saw	the	glow	of	our	house	through	the	trees	for	the

first	time.	The	view	was	magnificent.	We	were	in	love,	we	had	our	land,	and	we

were	building	our	future.

Frank	was	gone.	I	sprinkled	Dustbane	on	the	plywood	floor	and	swept	it.	We went	down	to	the	basement	to	stoke	the	stove	while	Whisky	cowered	at	the	top

of	 the	 stairs,	 terrified	 of	 fire.	 Our	 flashlight	 beams	 were	 white	 cones	 in	 the smoky	air.

We	took	the	utility	lamp	into	the	bedroom.	I	took	the	pistol	from	the	lockbox,

loaded	 it,	 and	 tucked	 it	 under	 a	 corner	 of	 the	 mattress.	 Pearl	 peeled	 back	 the plastic	 sheet	 covering	 the	 bed,	 pushed	 Whisky	 into	 the	 hallway,	 and	 closed	 the door.	 We	 put	 our	 clothes	 in	 plastic	 bags	 and	 slid	 naked	 between	 the	 sheets, shivering.	 I	 switched	 off	 the	 lamp.	 The	 moonbeam	 through	 the	 skylight	 fell	 on the	bed	like	a	spotlight—it	was	perfect.	We	pulled	back	the	blanket	and	began	to

make	 love.	 Whisky	 whined	 outside	 our	 bedroom	 door,	 as	 he	 would	 do	 every time	we	made	love.	I	jerked	and	pulled	back.

Pearl	pushed	me	off	her	and	sat	up.	“What’s	wrong?”

“Water	 dripped	 on	 my	 back.”	 I	 turned	 on	 the	 utility	 light	 and	 stood	 on	 the bed.	“Water	is	dripping	from	the	skylight.”

I	 covered	 the	 blanket	 with	 plastic	 and	 let	 Whisky	 in.	 We	 slid	 under	 the blanket	 and	the	plastic	sheet.	Whisky	lay	down	on	the	floor	next	to	Pearl.

“Why	does	Whisky	goes	to	your	side?”

“Animals	prefer	deafies.	I	told	you	before.	Is	it	quiet	here?”

“Inside,	I	hear	the	firewood	burning	and	the	refrigerator	motor.	Outside,	the

wind	moves	the	leaves,	like	this.”	I	rubbed	her	hands.	“The	leaves	whisper.”

On	our	first	night	on	Bowen	Island,	we	made	love	while	I	listened	to	water

dripping	on	the	plastic	sheet	above	my	back,	ticking	like	a	time	bomb.

At	sunrise,	Whisky’s	barking	jolted	us	awake.	We	looked	out	and	saw	two	deer

on	the	hill.

“One	window	is	higher	than	the	other,”	signed	Pearl.

“You	are	right.	It	looks	strange.	I	will	ask	Frank	to	fix	it.”

We	dressed,	made	the	bed,	and	covered	it	with	plastic.

After	 breakfast,	 Whisky	 barked	 furiously.	 Frank	 and	 his	 family	 had	 arrived.

Mrs.	 Schutt	 gave	 us	 a	 carrot	 cake	 as	 a	 housewarming	 gift.	 Frank	 showed	 her around	the	house.	Then	he	and	his	son	resumed	sanding	drywall	while	Pearl	and

I	continued	tidying	up	the	property.	Whisky,	tied	to	a	tree,	barked	and	lunged	at Frank	whenever	he	came	near.

That	 evening,	 when	 we	 returned	 from	 dinner	 at	 the	 Snuggler,	 fine	 white gypsum	 powder	 covered	 everything	 as	 if	 a	 blizzard	 had	 blown	 through	 the house.	The	dust	was	so	fine	it	clogged	the	vacuum	cleaner	in	minutes.	We	could

only	sweep	with	Dustbane	and	wet-mop.	The	dust	filled	our	nostrils	and	made	us

as	dirty	as	the	house.

We	showered	in	the	night	air	by	standing	naked	on	a	plank	behind	the	house and	taking	turns	aiming	the	hose.	The	water	system	had	not	yet	been	installed,	so the	 hose	 blasted	 cold	 groundwater	 at	 firehose	 pressure.	 Then,	 wearing	 only sandals,	 we	 ran	 to	 the	 basement	 by	 flashlight	 to	 warm	 ourselves	 before	 the woodstove,	like	a	sauna	in	reverse.

On	 Monday	 morning,	 we	 dressed	 in	 the	 basement,	 standing	 on	 a	 piece	 of plywood	on	the	gravel	floor.	We	drove	to	the	cove,	parked,	and	walked	onto	the

ferry	 for	 our	 first	 commute,	 along	 with	 200	 neighbors.	 I	 shaved	 in	 the	 ferry washroom	and	was	surprised	to	find	other	men	shaving.

We	commuted	by	ferry	and	bus	together,	ate	dinner	in	the	Snuggler	together,

and,	during	the	week,	showered	downtown	at	the	YMCA.	Because	vehicle	fare

was	 expensive,	 we	 drove	 the	 truck	 onto	 the	 ferry	 only	 once	 a	 week	 to	 buy supplies.	 We	 were	 becoming	 alarmed	 that	 progress	 had	 slowed	 when	 so	 much work	was	unfinished,	especially	Pearl.

“When	 are	 we	 going	 to	 have	 a	 toilet,	 lights,	 and	 a	 bath?	 My	 holiday	 starts next	week.	I	have	to	paint.”

“Frank	 said	 he	 would	 finish	 sanding	 next	 Sunday.	 He’s	 waiting	 for	 the

electrical	inspector.	Then	an	electrician	will	connect	the	house,	and	we	will	have power	and	water.”

I	used	a	vacation	day	to	meet	the	electrical	inspector.	Frank	wasn’t	licensed,	so	I had	 to	 attest	 that	 I,	 the	 homeowner,	 had	 done	 the	 wiring.	 I	 must	 have	 made	 a good	 impression	 on	 the	 inspector	 because	 he	 approved	 Frank’s	 wiring	 without entering	 the	 house.	 The	 next	 day,	 an	 electrician	 moved	 the	 power	 line	 to	 the house,	so	when	we	came	home	from	work,	we	had	electricity	in	the	sockets	and

a	few	lights	for	the	first	time.	The	light	fell	on	chaos,	but	we	were	thrilled	that civilization	had	reached	us.

On	the	weekend,	Frank	plumbed	the	wellhead	to	the	house	and	switched	on

the	water.	Pearl	flushed	the	toilet	and	cheered.	After	two	weeks	of	camping,	we

had	hot	water	and	a	toilet.

While	Frank	and	his	son	sanded	drywall,	I	filled	in	the	pipe	trench,	which	ran

from	 the	 wellhead	 to	 the	 house.	 I	 discovered	 Frank	 had	 spliced	 two	 pieces	 of pipe	for	our	water	main,	and	his	splice	was	leaking.	When	I	examined	it,	Frank

shouted	at	me	to	keep	shoveling—to	bury	his	defect	under	two	feet	of	soil!	I	re-

spliced	the	pipe	and	made	sure	the	leak	had	stopped	before	I	buried	it.

When	Frank	left,	we	put	on	masks	and	swept	and	wet-mopped	the	new	piles

of	 dust.	 At	 bedtime,	 I	 reached	 under	 the	 mattress,	 took	 the	 pistol,	 unloaded	 it, and	handed	it	to	Pearl.

“For	self-defense.	Do	you	remember	how	a	rifle	works?”

Pearl	nodded	and	mimed	pulling	the	bolt	and	taking	a	shot.

“A	 pistol	 is	 the	 same.	 It	 fires	 when	 it	 is	 loaded,	 the	 bolt	 is	 pulled,	 and	 the safety	is	off.”	I	loaded	the	gun,	cocked	it,	and	turned	the	safety	lever	on.	“Now it’s	safe—try	it.”

Pearl	pulled	the	trigger.	Nothing	happened.

I	turned	the	safety	off.	“Now,	it’s	not	safe.	The	red	dot	means	it	will	fire.”	I

turned	the	safety	back	on.	“We	will	leave	the	safety	on.	Whisky	is	your	alarm;

the	gun	is	your	defense.	If	a	stranger	comes,	lock	the	front	door,	come	here	in	the bedroom,	and	close	the	door.	Turn	the	safety	off,	stand	in	the	corner,	and	wait.	If a	man	walks	into	the	bedroom,	shoot	him.	Then	call	the	police.”

“Will	I	go	to	jail?”

“No.	When	he’s	inside,	not	invited,	and	you	fear	assault,	you	may	shoot	him.

Leo	keeps	a	pistol	under	the	mattress	for	his	wife,	too.”

Pearl	hugged	me.	“You	protect	me.	I	love	you.”

The	power	failed.	I	took	the	flashlight	from	my	pocket	and	used	it	to	find	the

kerosene	lamp	in	the	kitchen	and	light	it.	The	W-shaped	flame	cast	an	island	of

yellow	light.	It	flickered	as	I	carried	it	to	the	bedroom.

“I	feel	lost	when	the	power	goes	off,	like	I	am	deaf-blind.”

Pearl	stayed	home	and	painted	while	I	commuted	to	work.

When	I	came	home,	Pearl	signed,	“When	I	was	painting,	the	ladder	shook,	so

I	looked	down.	Whisky	was	bumping	it	to	call	me.	The	kitten	was	in	his	mouth,

dead.	 Whisky	 looked	 sad.	 His	 eyes	 said,	 ‘Please	 fix	 my	 friend.’	 We	 were	 both sad.	Tonight,	your	first	job	is	to	bury	the	cat.”

The	telephone	rang.	As	I	put	down	the	telephone,	I	laughed.	“A	man	saw	our

advertisement	 and	 asked	 if	 he	 could	 rent	 our	 barn	 to	 live	 in—himself,	 with	 no toilet,	heat,	and	light!”

“There	are	some	weird	people	on	Bowen	Island.”

We	 decided	 to	 introduce	 ourselves	 to	 Fran	 Thaxter	 so	 that	 she	 would	 have	 no reason	to	surprise	us	with	a	visit.	On	a	Saturday	morning,	we	walked	across	the

street	to	a	graveled	compound	with	a	bungalow	and	pickup	truck	on	one	side	and

cinder-block	sheds	of	machinery,	construction	materials,	and	fuel	drums	on	the

other.	Smoke	wafted	from	the	chimney.

When	 I	 rang	 the	 doorbell,	 barking	 erupted	 inside.	 A	 woman	 about	 ten	 years older	 than	 us	 with	 blonde	 hair,	 jeans,	 and	 an	 intense	 face	 opened	 the	 door	 and held	back	a	German	Shepherd.

“I	was	wondering	when	you’d	drop	by.	Come	in!	On	Bowen,	you	can	drop	in

on	your	neighbors	and	borrow	a	cup	of	sugar.	Don’t	mind	Bear.”

The	house	smelled	of	wood	smoke	and	cigarettes.	A	burly	man	dressed	like	a lumberjack	shook	my	hand.	“Morning.	I’m	Wayne.”

We	 accepted	 coffee	 but	 declined	 the	 cigarettes.	 Fran	 handed	 us	 mugs	 of Nescafé	and	we	sat	down.	A	wooden	model	of	our	house	sat	on	top	of	their	TV.

“I	hope	you’re	not	upset	we	bought	your	house,”	I	signed	and	said.

“No,	 that	 land	 wasn’t	 important.	 We	 own	 the	 land	 all	 around	 the	 lake, hundreds	of	acres.	We’ll	subdivide	it	when	prices	recover.”	Fran	pointed	to	the

model.	 “My	 former	 husband	 and	 I	 had	 it	 designed	 for	 adults	 at	 one	 end	 and teenagers	at	the	other	so	the	kids	wouldn’t	hear	us	in	our	bedroom.	That’s	why

the	 living	 and	 family	 rooms	 are	 in	 the	 middle.	 We	 planned	 how	 the	 sun	 and moon	 would	 shine	 through	 the	 windows	 and	 skylights.	 Take	 the	 model	 with you.”

“Keep	it.	We	have	the	blueprints.”

“My	 husband	 wanted	 to	 eat	 in	 the	 dining	 room	 every	 day.	 That’s	 why	 the dining	room	has	the	best	view.	I’d	love	to	see	the	house	when	you	are	finished.”

We	didn’t	want	to	owe	Fran	any	favors,	so	we	kept	our	visit	brief.

I	 searched	 the	 property	 titles	 at	 the	 Land	 Titles	 Office.	 The	 land	 around	 the lake	 was	 owned	 by	 the	 Union	 Steamship	 Company,	 which	 had	 once	 owned

much	 of	 Bowen	 Island.	 Fran’s	 lying	 only	 served	 to	 impress	 others	 or,	 perhaps, herself.





Trout	Lake	Farm

Our	 lives	 settled	 into	 a	 routine.	 We	 awoke	 at	 6:30,	 we	 took	 the	 7:30	 ferry followed	by	the	express	bus,	and	we	arrived	downtown	at	8:30.	We	enjoyed	our

commute,	 for	 we	 signed	 for	 ten	 hours	 a	 week,	 talking	 about	 everything.	 We shared	 the	 newspaper,	 and	 we	 read	 books.	 The	 ferry	 and	 bus	 were	 havens	 for bookworms,	 and	 we	 often	 talked	 to	 other	 commuters.	 Sometimes,	 post	 office shift	changes	forced	us	to	travel	separately	and	take	turns	picking	each	other	up in	the	truck	or	take	turns	hitchhiking	on	the	trunk	road.

One	 afternoon,	 I	 sat	 on	 the	 express	 bus	 next	 to	 a	 man	 in	 a	 black	 cotton overcoat.	Although	his	hair	was	thinning	and	tinged	with	gray,	he	appeared	just	a few	years	older	than	me.	His	aviator	glasses	magnified	the	twinkle	in	his	eye.	He looked	up	from	reading	 Object	Oriented	Programming.

“Haven’t	 you	 anything	 more	 interesting	 to	 read	 than	 Guide	 to	 Being	 Your Own	Contractor?”	He	laughed.

I	couldn’t	help	but	laugh,	too.	“I	see	you	are	in	computers.”

“That’s	my	job.	The	commute	gives	me	time	to	learn	and	think.	In	a	month,

you	 can	 sit	 on	 the	 top	 of	 the	 ferry	 and	 suntan	 while	 you	 commute.	 Take	 that, citysiders!”

“How	long	have	you	been	living	on	Bowen	Island?”

“Fifteen	years.”

I	smiled.	“That’s	a	long	time.”

“On	Bowen,	either	you	just	got	here,	or	you’ve	been	here	forever.	You	love	it,

or	 you	 hate	 it.	 I	 came	 in	 the	 counterculture	 days—back-to-the-land,	 Jefferson Airplane,	the	sixties,	all	of	it.”

“Where	do	you	live?”

“In	a	house	where	I	can	walk	to	the	ferry.	But	I	used	to	live	on	a	farm.	I	raised sheep	for	a	decade.”

“Did	it	pay?”

“It’s	a	long	story.”

“It’s	a	long	commute.”

The	man	looked	at	his	watch	and	smiled.	“Then	I’d	love	to	share	it	with	you.

Once	upon	a	time,	there	was	a	guy	named	Fernie,	an	engineer	and	investor	who

never	 lived	 on	 the	 island.	 Fernie	 bought	 twenty	 acres	 nestled	 in	 the	 hills	 back when	land	was	cheap.	It	had	a	broken-down	cabin	built	by	the	original	settlers.	It was	lovely,	but	to	Fernie,	it	was	a	tax	deduction—provided	it	was	worked	as	a

farm.	 So	 I	 took	 care	 of	 Fernie’s	 place	 for	 free	 rent,	 a	 stipend,	 and	 a	 share.	 I became	a	sharecropper.	There	were	only	500	people	on	Bowen	Island	in	1972.”

“How	long	had	the	cabin	been	abandoned?”

“Not	 long.	 A	 few	 years	 before	 me,	 a	 hippie	 couple	 approached	 Fernie	 and asked	 if	 they	 could	 squat	 in	 it	 if	 they	 fixed	 it	 up.	 Fernie	 agreed.	 By	 the	 third winter,	they’d	had	enough.	They	told	me	about	the	place.	I	moved	in,	and	I	built

the	farm	for	Fernie.”

“Alone?”

“Most	 of	 the	 time.	 It	 was	 fabulous,	 as	 in	 living	 a	 fable.	 The	 stars	 were	 my friends.	Living	without	human	reinforcement	purified	my	soul.”

“Why	did	you	give	it	up?”

“I	quit	while	I	was	ahead,”	he	said,	with	an	enigmatic	smile.	“I	moved	to	the

cove	and	started	a	garage	and	machine	shop.”

“What	did	you	do	for	power	and	water?”

“I	 had	 no	 power,	 just	 a	 battery	 for	 the	 stereo	 that	 Fernie	 charged	 for	 me.

Kerosene	lighting,	wood	heating,	water	from	a	well.”

“What	was	the	cabin	like?”

“It	 had	 one	 room	 and	 a	 loft	 for	 storage.	 I	 hung	 my	 toilet	 seat	 on	 the	 wall behind	the	stove	and	carried	it	to	the	outhouse	when	I	needed	it.	Nothing	moves

bowels	better	than	a	hot	seat	in	cold	air.”

“What	a	unique	living	room	decoration	that	must	have	been.”

Our	bus	arrived,	and	we	waited	in	the	ferry	departure	lounge.	He	took	a	bottle

of	Karo	out	of	his	overcoat	and	took	a	swig.	His	breath	smelled	of	ammonia.

“I	was	starting	to	fade.	Want	some?”

“Corn	syrup?	No,	thanks.	Diabetes?”

“Type	One.”

“Is	that	why	you	quit?”

“No.	I	went	blind.”

“I	saw	you	reading!”

The	 man	 grinned.	 “I	 was	 driving,	 and	 then	 the	 world	 started	 to	 go	 dark—

retinal	hemorrhage.	I	stopped	and	waved	for	someone	to	take	me	to	a	hospital.	I

was	blind	for	years,	a	member	of	the	Canadian	National	Institute	for	the	Blind.	I learned	to	read	Braille,	walk	with	a	white	cane,	and	eat	by	putting	my	meat	on

the	 plate	 at	 six	 o’clock.	 I	 never	 mastered	 urinals,	 though.	 The	 CNIB	 gave	 me vocational	 training,	 and	 that’s	 where	 I	 learned	 computers.	 Now	 I	 program assistive	devices	for	the	blind.”

“But	I	saw	you	reading!”

“Thanks	to	lasers,	I	eventually	regained	some	sight.”

“Would	you	like	a	lift?	My	truck	is	in	the	cove.”

“No,	 thanks.	 I	 have	 to	 walk	 home	 because	 I	 counted	 burning	 those	 calories when	I	drank	the	syrup.	Good	luck	with	the	Thaxter	place.”

We	bought	a	chainsaw,	hardhat,	and	wedges.	I	studied	the	instructions,	put	on	the hardhat,	 hearing	 protectors,	 and	 gloves,	 and	 carried	 our	 new	 chainsaw	 into	 the forest.	I	felled,	limbed,	and	bucked	trees.	I	was	careful	to	make	sure	the	trees	fell in	 the	 right	 direction	 because	 they	 could	 have	 killed	 us	 if	 I	 made	 a	 mistake.

While	I	bucked	the	trees,	Pearl	loaded	the	firewood	into	the	truck.	Each	time	the truck	was	full	of	wood,	we	drove	back	to	the	house	and	stacked	it.	We	worked	as

a	team	and	slept	deeply	every	weekend,	exhausted.

At	 the	 downtown	 bus	 stop,	 my	 new	 friend	 approached	 me	 and	 grinned.

“Derrick,	I’m	Ralph.”	The	bus	arrived.	Ralph	flashed	a	card	to	the	driver,	walked to	the	rear,	and	sat	down.

I	sat	beside	him.	“How	did	you	board	without	paying?”

“I’m	 a	 VIP.”	 Ralph	 chuckled	 as	 he	 showed	 me	 his	 Vision	 Impaired	 Pass.

“Now	 you	 know	 why	 I	 wear	 sunglasses	 while	 I’m	 waiting	 for	 the	 bus.	 No	 one asked	 me	 to	 return	 my	 VIP	 pass	 when	 I	 could	 see	 again.	 And	 I	 was	 a	 licensed driver	while	I	was	blind—no	one	asked	me	to	return	my	driver’s	license!

“What	did	you	do	when	you	weren’t	shepherding?”

“I’d	 go	 hiking	 with	 my	 goat,	 bring	 my	 cup,	 and	 milk	 her	 for	 refreshment.

Sometimes,	I	had	to	wait	for	her	to	eat	the	roses	along	the	way.	My	only	problem

was	dogs.	An	ewe	costs	a	hundred	bucks.	The	.44	magnum	on	my	belt	gave	me	a

reputation	as	a	wacko	even	though	it	is	legal	to	patrol	your	property	with	a	gun.”

“I’ll	bet	that	minimized	visitors.	You	only	shot	dogs?”

“And	 deer.	 Fernie	 and	 I	 love	 venison,	 so	 he	 installed	 a	 propane	 freezer	 for me.	Hunting	is	legal	on	Bowen	with	a	longbow	and	a	license.	So	I	got	a	longbow

and	a	license,	and	I	shot	them	with	my	gun—in	season,	of	course.	One	shot	can’t

be	traced.	Your	barn	would	make	a	good	hunting	blind.	At	twilight,	you	could	sit

on	a	bale	in	your	hayloft	and	wait	for	a	deer	to	walk	by.	Hay	muffles	gunshots,

but	if	you	don’t	want	any	noise,	make	a	silencer.”

The	bus	arrived	at	the	ferry	terminal.	Ralph	looked	at	his	watch.	“We	have	an

hour.	Come,	sit	in	my	jeep	with	me.”

I	 followed	 him	 to	 his	 Suzuki,	 almost	 as	 decrepit	 as	 Rokus’s.	 “Look	 in	 my glovebox.”	Ralph	handed	me	his	keys.

I	unlocked	the	glove	box	and	took	out	a	revolver.	“A	Charter	Arms	five-shot

belly	gun!	You	must	be	paranoid.”

“Paranoia	is	why	I	prefer	revolvers—the	shells	are	retained.”

“I’ve	 got	 the	 Charter	 Arms	 folding	 rifle.	 Are	 you	 licensed	 to	 drive	 around with	this?”

Ralph	nodded.	“I	am.	I	am	a	member	of	the	Barnet	Rifle	Club,	and	I	have	a Permit	to	Convey	my	gun	to	the	range.	Barnet	is	on	the	other	side	of	Vancouver,

so	that	lets	me	drive	my	gun	anywhere	between	here	and	there	when	the	range	is

open—and	it’s	open	daily	except	Christmas.	Last	year	I	drove	by	a	deer	lying	by

the	road	near	Tunstall	Bay;	someone	must	have	hit	it.	I	rushed	home	and	got	my

gun,	but	by	the	time	I	returned,	the	deer	was	gone.	Now	I	carry	my	gun	in	my

jeep.”

Ralph	was	a	good	storyteller.	I	put	the	gun	back.

“Dynamite	 is	 fun.	 I	 enjoyed	 stumping,	 clearing	 land.	 I	 kept	 my	 dynamite under	the	sofa.	Once	in	a	while,	I’d	invite	a	visitor	to	my	cabin.	At	night,	we’d sit	 by	 the	 stove	 in	 the	 lamplight,	 stoned	 in	 the	 silence	 of	 the	 woods.	 When	 the fire	ran	low,	I’d	add	some	wood,	and	then	I’d	take	a	stick	of	dynamite	and	toss	it into	the	stove.	You’ve	never	seen	 anyone	bolt	out	a	door	faster	into	the	snow.”

Ralph	roared	with	laughter.	“Without	a	blasting	cap,	dynamite	is	safe.	Two	bucks

a	laugh	but	worth	it	every	time.”

“What	a	lifestyle!”

“It	 was.	 Most	 people	 live	 parallel	 lives,	 where	 you	 live	 to	 work.	 You	 work and	live	every	day,	so	you	can’t	optimize	your	work	life	or	your	personal	life.	A serial	life	is	where	you	work	to	live.	First,	you	work	to	build	a	stash.	Then,	you live	your	life	if	you	still	have	the	strength.	People	who	live	serial	lives	often	end up	bitter	because	by	the	time	they	have	the	money	to	retire	early,	they	don’t	have the	health	to	enjoy	it.	I	had	a	reverse-serial	life.	But	that	only	works	for	stoics, like	me,	who	are	prepared	to	spend	our	youth	in	poverty.”

The	ferry	arrived.

“I	didn’t	expect	to	have	to	drive	after	dark.	Please	drive	me	home.	At	night,

my	vision	narrows	to	a	tunnel.	But	I	can’t	complain.	I	lived	while	I	could!”

On	Saturday	morning,	the	telephone	rang.	“Have	you	let	your	barn?”	said	a	man

with	an	English	accent.

“It’s	still	available.	Why	don’t	you	come	over?”

Whisky	barked	as	a	yellow	Volvo	station	wagon	rumbled	up	the	driveway.	A

man	with	a	gray	beard	and	a	woman	with	auburn	hair	stepped	out.	Their	names

were	Alan	and	Rose.	Pearl	made	tea,	and	we	sat	at	the	kitchen	table.

“When	we	moved	to	Canada,	Rose	dreamed	we	would	have	an	acreage,	ride

horses,	 raise	 lambs,	 and	 spin	 wool,”	 said	 Alan.	 “We	 grew	 up	 with	 Barbours, Wellingtons,	and	Tweed,	read	 Ten	Acres	Enough, 	and	fantasized.	Here	we	are—

with	no	land.	When	Rose	saw	your	advert,	she	thought	we	might	arrange	to	keep

a	few	sheep	on	your	property.”

“Let’s	 see	 what	 we	 can	 do	 together.	 Fields	 need	 to	 be	 foraged.	 Saplings	 are

shooting	up	already.”

The	four	of	us	walked	around	the	property	with	Whisky.	Back	in	the	house,	I

put	 the	 property	 plan	 on	 the	 table,	 and	 Alan	 and	 Rose	 outlined	 their	 ideas	 for running	 a	 handful	 of	 ewes	 and	 their	 lambs	 in	 the	 lower,	 south	 field.	 They sketched	 a	 fence	 built	 with	 wooden	 posts,	 barbed	 wire,	 and	 sheep	 mesh.	 They would	 supply	 the	 materials	 and	 hire	 a	 tractor	 to	 set	 the	 fenceposts.	 Then	 we would	build	the	fence	together.	Pearl	and	I	would	build	an	animal	shelter	in	the

lower	 field	 and,	 because	 the	 water	 in	 the	 lower	 field	 would	 freeze	 in	 winter, allow	them	to	use	the	barn	and	the	upper	field	in	the	winter.	This	meant	that	we

would	have	to	fence	the	upper	field	before	winter.	Their	project	would	last	two

years,	after	which	the	lower	field	fence	would	be	ours.	We	happily	agreed.

“Whisky	hears	something.”	Whisky	was	Pearl’s	ears.

“It’s	music.	It	must	be	coming	from	Fran’s,	and	it’s	getting	louder.	It	sounds

like	a	party.”

The	next	morning,	I	signed,	“There	was	music	all	night.	I	never	thought	I’d

hear	anything	here	but	the	wind	in	the	trees.”

“Please	check	to	be	sure	no	one	from	the	party	is	outside.”

I	 put	 Whisky	 on	 a	 leash	 and	 walked	 around	 our	 property	 on	 a	 glorious summer	 morning.	 The	 chirping	 of	 birds	 had	 replaced	 the	 thumping	 of	 rock music.	Whisky	and	I	walked	down	our	driveway	and	looked	across	the	road.	A

stage,	built	from	pallets,	stood	in	Fran’s	driveway.	It	was	surrounded	by	bottles, garbage,	and	crows.	We	walked	back	up	the	driveway	to	the	barn.	Whisky	ran	to

the	barn	and	leaped	up	and	down	below	the	hayloft,	barking.	Two	sleepy	heads

peered	down.

“Fran	said	we	could	sleep	here,”	said	one.

“You	have	to	ask	 me,	not	Fran.	Whose	party	was	it?”

“Fran’s	son	turned	sixteen.	We	all	got	wrecked.”

“You	can	go	now.	I’ll	tie	up	the	dog	for	a	while.”

After	 coffee,	 Pearl	 and	 I	 felled	 a	 dying	 maple	 tree	 on	 the	 property	 line	 near the	 barn.	 Disturbed	 by	 the	 chainsaw,	 the	 teens	 climbed	 down	 the	 ladder	 and shuffled	 down	 the	 driveway.	 That	 fifty-year-old	 tree	 yielded	 four	 truckloads	 of firewood.

The	Howe	Sound	Queen	rolled	and	pitched	its	way	to	Horseshoe	Bay	as	I	sat	in

our	truck	enjoying	pastry	and	coffee	from	the	Bowen	Island	Bakery.	I	loved	the

view	of	the	mountains	from	the	truck	on	the	days	when	I	drove	off	the	island	to

buy	provisions.	A	knock	on	the	window	brought	me	back	to	reality.

A	 man	 about	 my	 age	 asked	 me	 for	 a	 ride,	 so	 I	 told	 him	 to	 hop	 in,	 and	 I

introduced	myself.

“My	 name	 is	 Stanley.	 You	 and	 your	 deaf	 wife	 bought	 the	 Thaxter	 place, didn’t	 you?	 I	 couldn’t	 help	 notice	 the	 antenna	 on	 your	 truck.	 I’m	 a	 radio	 ham, too!	 I	 work	 downtown	 at	 Eaton’s	 department	 store,	 in	 debt	 collections.	 On	 the weekends,	I’m	a	Vancouver	Police	reservist.”

“That’s	interesting.	I	was	a	West	Vancouver	Police	reservist	for	three	years.”

“I	wanted	to	be	a	career	cop,	but	I	didn’t	qualify	because	I’m	deaf	in	my	right

ear.”

“Then	why	did	you	join	the	police	reserve?”

“I	use	the	police	databases	to	help	me	trace	debtors.	My	wife,	Gertrude,	and	I

are	building	a	house	on	Eagle	Cliff.	Come	visit.”

We	talked	about	our	hobbies,	and	Stanley	sketched	a	map.

A	 couple	 of	 weeks	 later,	 Pearl	 and	 I	 followed	 Stanley’s	 map	 to	 his	 house.	 We parked	 our	 pickup	 at	 the	 roadside	 and	 walked	 up	 his	 steep	 access	 road,	 the pavement	 turning	 to	 gravel	 after	 it	 passed	 a	 cluster	 of	 houses.	 Tracks	 branched out	 into	 the	 trees	 and	 led	 to	 houses	 in	 various	 stages	 of	 completion.	 Stanley’s place	was	beyond	all	of	them,	at	the	top.	The	gravel	road	stopped	at	an	old	four-wheel-drive	 GMC	 Suburban.	 We	 walked	 past	 spare	 truck	 parts	 to	 a	 single-axle trailer.	 Behind	 it	 stood	 the	 frame	 of	 a	 two-story	 house,	 the	 tarpaper	 sheathing braving	the	elements	without	the	protection	of	siding.

“So	small.	I	can’t	imagine	living	in	this	trailer,”	Pearl	signed.

Gertrude,	 a	 small	 woman	 with	 straight	 brown	 hair,	 opened	 the	 door	 and

beckoned	us	to	come	in.

“Welcome!”	 Stanley	 shouted.	 “Wait	 while	 I	 clear	 some	 space.	 We	 don’t	 get many	guests.”	We	squeezed	onto	the	bench	seats	on	the	sides	of	the	table.	Boxes,

clothes,	 tools,	 and	 books	 blocked	 what	 little	 daylight	 penetrated	 the	 trailer through	the	forest	and	louvered	windows.	“We	use	the	table-bed	as	a	table,	the

sofa-bed	as	a	bed,	and	the	bunk	bed	as	storage.	There’s	a	Porta-Potty	outside.”

Pearl	looked	around.	“Where	do	you	shower?”

“At	work.	When	we	can’t	shower	at	work,	we	wash	outside.	We	have	to	be

living	 in	 the	 house	 by	 winter	 because	 we	 only	 have	 a	 heater	 running	 off	 an extension	cord	from	my	neighbor.	The	cord	is	so	long,	we	can’t	turn	more	than

one	thing	on	at	a	time.	There’s	no	phone,	so	ham	radio	comes	in	handy.”

I	pointed	at	a	black	oval	sticking	out	from	under	a	pile	of	clothes	on	the	bunk

bed.

Stanley	grinned.	“That’s	my	Remington	12-gauge.”

“It	lets	him	feel	he’s	got	something	to	protect,”	said	Gertrude.

“Things	were	better	before.	I	was	a	bailiff.	Then	we	bought	a	tow	truck.	But,

one	by	one,	the	private	lots	contracted	to	UniPark,	so	we	went	bust.	Gertrude’s waitressing	 kept	 us	 going.”	 Stanley	 sighed.	 “I	 once	 impounded	 a	 Rolls-Royce.

Next	day,	a	guy	knocks	and	asks	how	many	trucks	we	got.”

“I	told	him	we	had	three,”	said	Gertrude.	“But	we	had	only	one.”

“So	 this	 guy	 gives	 us	 three	 padded	 car	 covers	 and	 says,	 ‘If	 you	 ever	 tow	 a Royce	again,	you	must	cover	it	first.’	Ha-ha!”

Pearl	 laughed.	 “My	 boss	 had	 a	 Rolls-Royce.	 He	 owned	 a	 restaurant	 on

Broadway	 where	 I	 worked	 as	 a	 waitress.	 I	 gave	 customers	 a	 paper	 and	 pencil with	the	menu,	and	they	wrote	their	orders	on	the	paper.	I	quit	when	I	saw	a	dead body	 fall	 out	 from	 behind	 a	 curtain!	 It’s	 true!	 I’ve	 seen	 so	 many	 things	 you wouldn’t	believe.”

“You	were	a	waitress?”	Her	dead-body-behind-the-curtain	story	sounded	like

a	cliché,	but	she	was	convinced	it	was	true.

“I	was	a	waitress	after	I	left	my	husband.”

We	all	walked	to	their	construction	site.	The	front	door	was	held	closed	by	a

stick	on	a	rubber	band	through	a	hole.

“The	house	will	have	a	kitchen,	living	room,	and	dining	room	downstairs,	and

three	bedrooms	upstairs,”	said	Stanley.	“I’m	doing	the	plumbing	and	wiring	now.

When	that’s	done,	and	I	get	a	stove	and	some	drywall	in	downstairs,	we’ll	move

in.”

“Where’s	your	well?”

“That	comes	later.”

“How	did	you	get	a	building	permit?”

“I	 don’t	 have	 one,	 and	 that’s	 why	 we	 don’t	 invite	 many	 visitors.	 No	 permit means	no	mortgage,	and	that’s	why	it	will	take	us	years	to	finish	our	house.	No

one	lives	like	this	by	choice.”

“How	 are	 you	 going	 to	 connect	 power?	 That	 needs	 an	 inspection,	 which

needs	an	electric	permit,	which	needs	a	building	permit,	which	needs	water	and

septic	permits.”

“I	 just	 hope	 when	 the	 house	 is	 finished,	 we	 won’t	 have	 to	 tear	 it	 down.

Meanwhile,	there’s	my	neighbor’s	extension	cord	and	water.”

Pearl	 could	 see	 that	 our	 house	 problems	 were	 trivial	 compared	 to	 Stanley’s illegal	house.

A	 man	 leaned	 over	 from	 the	 next	 booth	 in	 the	 Snuggler.	 “You	 guys	 rented	 out your	barn?”

Pearl	and	I	looked	up	from	our	meal.

“We	received	two	calls:	one	from	a	guy	who	wanted	to	live	in	it	and	the	other

from	a	guy	who	wants	it	for	sheep.”

“That’s	because	you’re	offering	 half	board.	Most	owners	have	a	stable	before they	buy	a	horse.	Donna	and	me,	we	got	a	horse	but	no	stable.	I’m	not	gonna	go

up	 and	 down	 your	 driveway	 twice	 a	 day	 to	 feed	 him,	 especially	 in	 winter.	 But full	board? 	I’d	be	interested.”

“What’s	the	going	rate	for	full	board?”

“One	hundred	and	fifty.	Hay	and	grain	will	cost	you	half	of	that.”

“Where	can	we	get	hay	and	grain?”

The	man	laughed.	“Hay	from	Vanderveen’s,	in	Surrey.	They	deliver.	Or	haul

fifteen	 or	 twenty	 bales	 in	 your	 truck.	 The	 Bowen	 Garden	 Shop	 sells	 grain.	 It costs	a	little	more	than	on	the	mainland,	but	you	should	support	local	business.”

“I	know	how	to	feed	horses,”	signed	Pearl.

“I’m	Gus.”

“Good	to	meet	you.	I	suppose	you	already	know	who	we	are.”

“Of	course!”

I	 smiled.	 “Pearl	 and	 I	 need	 to	 discuss	 this,”	 I	 said.	 “What	 do	 you	 think?”	 I signed.

“This	 is	 our	 chance	 to	 start	 a	 business.	 It	 is	 hard	 to	 get	 the	 first	 customer.”

Pearl	signed.

“He	says	Mouse	won’t	escape,	but	we	will	need	a	fence	by	winter,	for	Alan.

If	it	costs	$2,000,	it	will	take	two	years	of	boarding	to	pay	for	it.”

“That’s	for	one	horse,	but	we	will	get	more	horses.”

“All	right,	Gus.	When	do	you	want	to	start?”	“I’ll	give	you	a	month	to	get	set

up.	Make	sure	to	get	Buckerfield’s	Complete	Horse	grain	and	fresh	timothy	hay,

and	 make	 a	 door	 to	 lock	 up	 the	 grain	 to	 keep	 Mouse	 out	 of	 it.	 Don’t	 feed	 him that	old	hay	in	your	barn.”	Gus	pressed	his	cigarette	into	the	ashtray	and	stood

up.	“Then	you	feed	him	twice	a	day,	rain	or	shine.	Whenever	you	need	a	hand,

I’ll	help	you.”

“Here’s	the	fence	plan,	bill	of	materials,	and	the	letter	of	agreement,”	said	Alan.

“We	can	repair	the	posts	and	wire	along	the	trunk	road.	We	need	new	posts	only

around	 the	 other	 sides.	 About	 270	 meters	 of	 fencing	 surrounding	 a	 third	 of	 a hectare	will	cost	us	$1,000,	for	which	you	give	us	two	years	of	summer	pasture

plus	winter	barn	use.”

Pearl	and	I	agreed	and	signed	his	letter.	We	all	put	on	work	clothes	and	drove

to	the	lower	field.	Rose	and	Pearl	cleared	brush	and	stones.	Alan	and	I	repaired

the	old	fence	along	the	road	and	then	cleared	saplings	by	pulling	them	out	with

the	truck.

We	marked	out	the	new	fence	line	with	orange	twine.	We	drove	to	the	Bowen

Building	Centre,	where	Alan	bought	eighty-two	pressure-treated	fenceposts.	We

trucked	 them	 to	 the	 property	 in	 several	 loads	 and	 laid	 them	 out	 at	 two-meter intervals.	Our	arms	were	aching.

A	few	days	later,	Alan	and	I	greeted	Eddie,	the	island’s	busiest	backhoe	man.

We	 held	 each	 post	 while	 Eddie’s	 backhoe	 pushed	 it	 into	 the	 soil.	 By	 late afternoon,	all	the	posts	were	set.

On	 Saturday,	 Alan	 delivered	 the	 fence	 materials,	 and	 now	 the	 hard	 work began.	I	supplied	the	tools,	and	Alan	and	I	worked	on	the	fence	in	the	summer

heat.	 It	 took	 all	 day	 to	 build	 four	 corner	 braces	 and	 two	 gatepost	 braces.	 Pearl alternated	 between	 weeding	 the	 garden	 and	 helping	 Alan	 and	 me.	 Weeding	 the garden	 had	 become	 a	 chore	 because	 the	 manure	 we	 had	 spread	 had	 not	 yet composted;	in	our	ignorance,	we	had	sown	our	garden	with	weed	seeds.

On	 Sunday,	 Alan,	 Pearl,	 and	 I	 started	 laying	 sheep	 fencing.	 The	 three	 of	 us unrolled,	dragged,	pulled,	and	hammered	the	heavy	mesh	in	the	heat.

Alan	returned	the	next	Saturday.	“Can	you	give	me	a	hand	with	this	urinal?”

he	said,	opening	the	Volvo’s	tailgate.

“Don’t	sheep	pee	on	the	ground?”	I	signed	and	said.

Pearl	laughed.

“It’s	a	perfect	water	trough,”	said	Alan.	“The	sheep	can’t	knock	it	over.	And

it	was	free.”

Alan,	Pearl,	and	I	continued	dragging,	pulling,	and	hammering	sheep	fencing.

Then,	 over	 two	 more	 exhausting	 days,	 we	 went	 around	 and	 around	 the	 field unrolling,	 stretching,	 and	 hammering	 barbed	 wire.	 We	 used	 the	 come-along	 to pull	the	wires	so	tight	they	hummed	when	struck.	The	pitch	was	so	low	that	Alan

and	I	couldn’t	hear	it,	so	all	three	of	us	enjoyed	it	equally,	by	feeling	it,	before we	hammered	the	wires	down	tight.	The	barbs	snagged	our	clothes	and	lacerated

our	skin.

When	 the	 fence	 was	 done,	 Alan	 and	 I	 built	 a	 metal	 aqueduct	 over	 the

driveway	to	carry	water	to	the	urinal	through	a	valve	on	a	fencepost	next	to	the

driveway.	For	years,	twice	a	day,	Pearl	or	I	would	pause	in	the	truck	on	the	way

to	the	ferry,	open	the	valve,	and	wait	a	minute	while	water	flushed	and	refilled

the	urinal	for	the	sheep.

Whisky	 barked	 as	 the	 yellow	 Volvo	 chugged	 up	 the	 driveway	 on	 a	 Saturday morning.	Pearl	and	I	joined	Alan	and	Rose	in	the	barn.	They	had	nailed	plywood

over	two	of	the	three	barn	door	openings.	They	backed	the	Volvo	into	the	third

door,	opened	the	tailgate,	and,	aided	by	their	three	children,	released	four	sheep into	the	barn.

Pearl’s	smile	reached	from	ear	to	ear.	“They’re	beautiful!”

“Dorsets,”	said	Rose.	“They	are	a	lovely	white,	aren’t	they?”

Pearl	tried	to	pet	them.	“They	walk	away.”

“When	you	feed	them,	they	won’t.”

“Why	did	you	put	them	in	the	barn,	not	the	field?”	I	signed	and	said.

“To	trim	their	hooves	and	sheep-dip	them,”	said	Alan.

“How	do	you	dip	a	sheep?”

“With	 a	 watering-can.	 We’ll	 do	 their	 pedicure	 first.	 You	 have	 to	 trim	 their hooves	if	they	are	penned	because	they	don’t	wear	naturally.”

The	 sheep	 were	 clipped,	 dipped,	 and	 left	 to	 dry.	 In	 the	 afternoon,	 Rose	 and Alan	stuffed	the	sheep	back	into	the	Volvo.	He	backed	it	into	the	lower	field,	and the	 sheep	 jumped	 to	 freedom	 in	 the	 sunshine.	 They	 ran	 to	 the	 other	 end	 of	 the field	and	started	grazing.

“This	is	a	wonderful	sight,”	Pearl	signed.

“Are	you	interested	in	goats?”	said	Rose.	“The	woman	who	sold	us	the	sheep,

Patty,	has	two	goats	to	give	away,	but	they	must	be	milked	twice	daily.”

I	looked	at	Pearl.	“What	do	you	think?”

She	smiled.	“Do	you	know	how	to	milk	a	goat?”

“No.	Do	you?”

“No.”

“You	can	keep	them	with	our	sheep	for	a	while,”	said	Rose.	“Goats	don’t	like

grass,	 so	 they’ll	 first	 eat	 the	 weeds.	 But	 when	 the	 weeds	 are	 gone,	 they’ll compete	with	the	sheep	for	grass,	so	you’ll	need	to	move	the	goats	to	the	upper

field.	First,	you’ll	need	to	fence	it.”

“We	need	to	fence	it	soon	for	Gus’s	horse,”	I	signed	and	said.

“Lovely,”	said	Alan.	“Until	you	can	keep	your	goats	near	the	barn,	you’ll	be

milking	them	in	the	rain	on	your	way	to	work.”

Pearl	 and	 I	 drove	 to	 Patty’s	 hobby	 farm	 in	 Richmond.	 She	 was	 a	 retiree	 living her	passion	for	life	beyond	the	sidewalks.	She	led	us	past	fruit	trees	wrapped	in wire	mesh	and	into	her	barn.	Inside	it	stood	two	white	goats	with	horns.

“The	 doe	 is	 seven.	 The	 yearling	 is	 her	 daughter.	 Aren’t	 they	 adorable?”	 she said,	 with	 an	 Irish	 lilt.	 “Saanens—the	 Holsteins	 of	 the	 caprine	 world. Sahne means	cream	in	German.”

Pearl	petted	them,	and	the	goats	clamored	for	more	petting.

“What	do	you	feed	them?”

“Hay	 and	 Buckerfield’s	 Complete	 Goat.	 You’ll	 need	 a	 manger.	 Goats	 won’t eat	hay	off	the	ground.”

“When	they	have	kids,	what	do	you	do	with	them?”

“Sell	 them	 at	 auction.	 I	 try	 not	 to	 think	 about	 what	 happens	 to	 them afterward.	Have	you	ever	milked?”

We	shook	our	heads.	Patty	put	some	grain	in	a	milking	stand.	The	older	doe hopped	up	onto	the	stand	and	began	to	nibble.

“Wash	 and	 dry	 her	 teats.	 Give	 her	 a	 pint	 of	 grain;	 that’s	 her	 reward	 for standing	 still.	 Milk	 with	 both	 hands	 in	 a	 wave	 motion.”	 A	 stream	 of	 milk squirted	onto	the	ground.	“But	use	a	pail	to	collect	it!	I	can	spare	three	bags	of grain;	 that’ll	 do	 for	 a	 month.	 When	 you	 go	 to	 Buckerfield’s,	 buy	 a	 salt	 block.

You	try	it.”

Pearl	milked	perfectly.	I	struggled	to	learn	the	technique.

“It’s	easier	for	her	because	her	hands	are	smaller.	Are	you	prepared	to	do	this

at	seven	in	the	morning	and	evening?”

Pearl	nodded.	“We’ll	soon	have	a	horse	to	feed	twice	a	day,	too.”

“And	when	snow	is	blowing?	And	when	you	have	the	flu?”

We	nodded.

“Grand.	Come	to	my	house.”

Patty	poured	us	milk	from	the	refrigerator.

“It	tastes	like	normal	milk,”	signed	Pearl.

“It’s	three	percent	fat,	naturally	homogenized.	Healthier	than	cow’s	milk.”

Patty	 lined	 the	 bed	 of	 our	 truck	 with	 straw.	 We	 lifted	 each	 animal	 into	 the truck	and	tied	it	so	it	could	stand	up	or	lie	down.	Pearl	climbed	up	and	sat	with the	goats.

An	hour	later,	as	we	crawled	along	Denman	Street	in	a	Vancouver	traffic	jam,

Pearl	tapped	on	the	window.	“Everyone	is	waving	at	me!”

We	released	the	goats	into	our	lower	field.	They	trotted	to	a	cluster	of	bushes

and	 began	 to	 eat.	 “Shall	 we	 name	 them	 Mothergoat	 and	 Daughtergoat?”	 Pearl signed.

After	 dinner,	 we	 filled	 a	 pail	 with	 grain,	 took	 a	 wet	 cloth	 and	 a	 clean	 pail, walked	 to	 the	 field,	 and	 climbed	 over	 the	 stile.	 A	 sheep	 walked	 slowly	 toward Pearl,	 then	 broke	 into	 a	 canter.	 In	 a	 moment,	 all	 four	 sheep	 bellowed	 and stampeded	to	Pearl.

“Oh. Oh. OH! ”	said	Pearl,	holding	the	grain	pail	over	her	head	as	the	sheep crowded	around	her	legs,	bleating	and	shoving.

The	 goats	 stood	 back	 and	 watched.	 It	 was	 hilarious.	 I	 took	 the	 grain	 bucket from	 Pearl	 and	 walked	 to	 the	 goats.	 They	 let	 me	 approach,	 but	 the	 sheep wouldn’t	leave	us	alone.	I	held	Mothergoat’s	collar,	kicked	a	sheep,	and	cursed

it.	The	sheep	backed	off.	Pearl	threw	pebbles	at	the	sheep	and	chased	them	away.

Pearl	put	the	clean	pail	on	the	ground	under	Mothergoat’s	udder	and	squatted

to	 milk	 her.	 I	 held	 the	 goat’s	 collar	 with	 one	 hand	 and	 offered	 her	 the	 grain bucket	with	the	other.	While	she	ate	the	grain,	her	body	walked	sideways	away

from	Pearl	to	evade	the	hands	of	this	unfamiliar	milker.	She	pivoted	around	me

like	a	ship	pivoting	around	its	anchor.	Pearl,	still	squatting,	crept	after	her	udder, walking	like	a	Cossack	dancer.

Daughtergoat	walked	up	to	me,	stood	on	her	hind	legs,	and	leaned	against	my

chest	 with	 her	 forelegs.	 As	 Mothergoat’s	 collar	 pulled	 one	 hand	 sideways,	 and her	 head	 in	 the	 grain	 bucket	 pushed	 my	 other	 hand	 down,	 Daughtergoat	 butted Mothergoat	 and	 shoved	 her	 own	 head	 into	 the	 grain	 bucket.	 Both	 of	 us	 could hardly	stop	laughing,	but	the	goats	still	needed	to	be	milked.

Pearl	stood	up.	“I	give	up!	She	won’t	stand	still!”

My	hands	were	full,	so	I	couldn’t	sign.	I	held	the	grain	bucket	over	my	head,

walked	Mothergoat	to	the	fence,	and	tied	her	collar	to	the	fence	so	she	couldn’t

turn	sideways.	Pearl	wiped	her	teats	again	and	began	to	milk	her.	Although	the

goat	could	no	longer	move	sideways,	the	grain	had	all	been	eaten,	so	she	was	no

longer	interested	in	standing	still.	She	stepped	forward—into	the	milk	pail.

Pearl	was	spitting	mad.	I	was	laughing	hysterically.

“Just	squirt	her	milk	on	the	ground.”

When	Mothergoat’s	udder	was	empty,	we	tied	Daughtergoat	to	the	fence	and

milked	her	onto	the	ground	as	well.	We	walked	home	carrying	the	grain	and	milk

pails.	Both	were	empty,	yet	both	of	us	were	smiling.

Milking	soon	became	quick,	efficient,	and	fun	as	the	goats	came	to	trust	us,

and	 after	 we	 learned	 to	 tie	 one	 goat	 to	 the	 fence	 while	 the	 other	 was	 being milked.	The	sheep	realized	we	had	no	food	for	them	and	left	us	alone.

I	made	a	pail	carrier	that	doubled	as	a	stool.	Bowen	Islanders	waved	as	they

drove	 past	 on	 the	 trunk	 road,	 and	 a	 few	 stopped	 to	 take	 photographs.	 We weighed	and	recorded	the	milk	and	filtered	it	into	milk	bottles.	We	drank	a	lot	of milk.

My	 father	 came	 over	 on	 a	 Saturday	 morning	 ferry	 for	 a	 day	 of	 handiwork.	 We built	barn	doors	and	a	milking	stand.	We	marked	the	upper	field	fence	line	and

bought	110	fenceposts	at	the	Bowen	Building	Centre,	making	several	trips	in	the

truck	 to	 deliver	 them.	 Then	 Father	 drove	 the	 truck	 along	 the	 fence	 line	 while	 I pulled	 posts	 off	 the	 back	 one	 by	 one,	 arranging	 them	 for	 the	 backhoe.	 Whisky was	our	companion,	often	rolling	on	his	back	in	the	grass.

When	 we	 were	 done,	 we	 walked	 into	 the	 kitchen.	 Pearl	 was	 looking	 in	 the refrigerator.	 “Take	 some	 milk	 with	 you.	 We	 get	 three	 liters	 a	 day—we	 can’t drink	it	fast	enough!”

“Make	cheese,”	said	Father.	“It’s	nature’s	way	of	preserving	milk.”

The	next	day,	I	photocopied	cheese-making	recipes	at	the	library.	“It’s	easy,”

I	 signed.	 “Milk,	 salt,	 and	 rennet	 are	 all	 we	 need.	 And	 a	 pot,	 thermometer,	 and cheesecloth.”

It	took	me	an	hour	of	telephone	calls	to	find	the	only	rennet	in	Vancouver—at Galloway’s	Specialty	Foods,	next	door	to	the	food	fair	where	Pearl	and	I	met!

Pearl	steadied	the	twenty-liter	pot	on	the	stove	while	I	poured	in	the	milk.	It

took	 an	 hour	 to	 reach	 thirty	 degrees.	 We	 added	 rennet,	 and	 the	 milk	 slowly curdled.	An	hour	later,	I	sliced	the	curd	floating	on	the	top	into	squares.	Slowly, it	sank	to	the	bottom.	An	hour	later,	we	poured	out	the	greenish	whey.	I	draped

cheesecloth	 over	 a	 strainer	 and	 poured	 the	 curds	 into	 it.	 I	 kneaded	 salt	 into	 the curds,	 tied	 the	 corners	 of	 the	 cheesecloth	 together	 with	 twine,	 and	 held	 the dripping	white	orb	over	a	pan.	“Cottage	cheese,	from	our	cottage.”

In	the	basement,	I	hung	the	twine	from	the	ceiling	while	Pearl	set	a	pan	under

it	 to	 collect	 the	 drips.	 Whisky	 licked	 the	 whey	 from	 the	 pan	 as	 quickly	 as	 it landed.	It	was	the	first	installment	of	an	easy	ritual	we	would	perform	every	two weeks	for	the	next	two	years.

We	drove	to	Buckerfield’s	in	Langley.	We	bought	hay,	alfalfa,	straw,	grain,	peat

moss,	lime,	salt	blocks,	an	electric	fence	charger	and	insulators,	a	manure	scoop, a	 pitchfork,	 and	 a	 teat	 washer.	 When	 I	 drove	 off,	 the	 steering	 was	 heavy.	 I realized	we	were	hauling	a	ton, double	what	the	Nissan	was	built	to	carry.	The engine	 stalled	 on	 our	 first	 attempt	 to	 go	 up	 the	 driveway.	 I	 backed	 down,	 tried again,	and	crawled	up	the	twenty	percent	grade	with	the	pedal	to	the	floor.

At	the	barn,	Pearl	stood	in	the	hayloft	while	I	stood	in	the	back	of	the	truck

and	lifted	the	forty-five	kilogram	bales	past	the	 DE	MAL	EN	PIS	 sign	 to	 her.	 I was	dripping	with	sweat,	and	my	arms	were	itchy	from	hay	scratches.	We	stored

the	grain	and	tools	in	the	feed	room	and	bolted	the	door	against	animals.	We	did

chores	together,	bathed	together,	fell	into	bed	together,	and	held	hands	in	the	I-love-you	sign.	We	were	too	tired	to	do	more.

We	were	exhausted	yet	happy.	We	were	optimistic	that	after	Frank	was	out	of

the	 picture,	 we	 would	 soon	 have	 a	 home	 to	 be	 proud	 of,	 and	 we	 would	 start	 a family.	I	spent	lunchtimes	at	the	library	researching	stable	management.

“Four	 horses	 would	 pay	 half	 our	 mortgage,	 and	 four	 horses	 would	 not	 be much	more	work	than	one,”	I	signed.

“More	horses	would	be	less	work	because	when	we	buy	lots	of	feed,	we	can

have	it	delivered.”

I	 returned	 from	 the	 basement	 with	 a	 white	 teardrop.	 “Chèvre—our	 first	 goat cheese.”

Pearl	poked	it.	“It	shrank.”

I	peeled	off	the	cheesecloth,	cut	the	orb	in	half,	cut	a	wedge,	and	ate	it.	I	gave Pearl	a	piece.

She	ate	it,	and	we	looked	at	each	other,	grinning.	“It	tastes	like	nothing.	It	has bubbles.”

“It’s	like	ricotta,	but	firmer.	For	salads,	pizza,	pasta,	and	sandwiches.”

Pearl	laughed.	“No	one	made	cheese	for	me	before!”

On	Saturday	morning,	Whisky	barked.	Pearl	and	I	looked	down	from	our	dining

room	window	to	see	a	cowboy	in	a	Stetson	riding	up	our	driveway.

“Gus	looks	like	the	Marlboro	man,”	signed	Pearl.

We	put	on	our	gumboots	and	walked	to	the	barn.	Gus	dismounted,	the	saddle

creaking.	Pearl	scratched	Mouse	under	the	chin.

“Mornin’,”	Gus	said.	He	walked	Mouse	into	the	barn,	opened	the	tack	room

door,	and	put	the	saddle	and	bridle	on	the	floor	inside.

“Make	a	saddlehorse,	will	ya?	Keeps	the	leather	dry.”

Mouse	munched	on	the	grass,	then	lay	down	and	rolled	on	his	back.

“Mouse	 has	 come	 home;	 he	 lived	 here	 before.	 Sixteen	 hands	 of	 Appaloosa gelding.”	 Gus	 climbed	 up	 the	 hayloft	 ladder.	 A	 moment	 later,	 a	 flake	 of	 hay dropped	into	a	manger.	Mouse	walked	straight	to	that	stall	and	ate.	Gus	climbed

down.

“Do	you	ride	him	often?”	signed	Pearl.

“Mainly	my	wife	and	daughter	ride.	You	can	ride	him,	too.	Exercise	is	good

for	him.	As	sweet	a	horse	as	you’ll	find,”	he	said,	stroking	Mouse.	“And	don’t

forget	to	keep	the	wire	gate	across	your	driveway	closed.”

“Sorry,	 we	 have	 to	 leave	 it	 open.	 The	 barbed	 wire	 will	 wreck	 my	 suits.	 But we’ll	have	this	field	fenced	in	a	few	weeks.”

“You	gotta	keep	Mouse	from	goin’	to	the	road.”	Gus	lit	a	cigarette.	“Mouse

respects	electric	fences,	so	hang	orange	twine	around	the	field,	and	Mouse	won’t

go	near	it.”

Pearl	and	I	made	a	temporary	fence	from	bright	orange	twine.	Gus	was	right:

half	a	ton	of	horse	avoided	an	ounce	of	twine.

Pearl	 and	 I	 worked	 with	 enthusiasm	 on	 building	 up	 our	 business.	 I	 stained	 a plank	with	creosote,	engraved	it,	and	nailed	it	to	our	fence:

TROUT	LAKE	FARM

Horse	Boarding	947-2574

We	joined	the	Bowen	Island	Horse	Owners	&	Riders	Association	and	subscribed

to	 United	 Caprine	 News, The	 Gaitpost,	 and	 Countryside	 magazine.	 We	 learned to	vaccinate.

Alan	 rented	 Bowen’s	 only	 ram,	 rubbed	 red	 ochre	 on	 its	 belly,	 and	 released

him	in	the	field.	Within	a	few	days,	all	the	ewes’	rumps	were	the	telltale	color.

There	was	no	buck	on	Bowen	to	service	our	does.	Ralph	suggested	we	buy	a

yearling,	give	him	a	few	days	in	the	harem,	and	then	make	dog	food	of	him,	so	I

drove	to	the	Fraser	Valley	Livestock	Auction.	Tools	and	crafts	were	sold	off	the

tailgates	 of	 pickup	 trucks	 in	 the	 parking	 lot.	 But	 there	 was	 only	 one	 male	 at auction	 that	 day,	 and	 he	 was	 huge.	 After	 driving	 so	 far	 and	 facing	 the	 same costly	trip	home,	I	bid	on	him.	My	bid	won.	Jonathan	stank,	but	he	made	friends

with	Whisky,	Mouse,	and	our	two	does.	He	never	became	dog	food.

While	 Pearl	 did	 the	 evening	 chores,	 I	 opened	 a	 bottle	 of	 wine.	 When	 she returned,	she	kissed	me	and	slumped	onto	a	chair.

“Give	the	dog	food	and	water.	Measure	the	goat	grain.	Put	the	grain	and	milk

containers	in	the	carrier.	Walk	down	to	the	lower	field	and	climb	over	the	stile.

Tie	one	goat	to	the	fence.	Put	half	the	grain	in	the	stand.	Wash	teats.	Milk	one

goat.	Untie	that	goat.	Repeat	for	the	other	goat.	Climb	over	the	stile,	and	don’t spill	 the	 milk	 or	 rip	 my	 clothes.	 Walk	 up	 the	 hill	 to	 the	 barn.	 Refill	 the	 horse water	pails.	Climb	to	the	hayloft.	Drop	hay	down	the	hole.	Measure	horse	grain

in	the	feed	room	and	pour	it	into	the	manger.	Walk	home.	Weigh	and	filter	the

milk.	Wash	the	container.	Morning	and	night,	together	and	taking	turns.	But	I’m

not	complaining.	I	feel	our	life	improving.”

“Yes.	Tonight	I	will	show	you	something	special.”

“I	thought	so.	This	is	our	first	wine	since	we	moved	in.”

Pearl	 and	 I	 walked	 out	 into	 the	 polarized	 twilight	 under	 the	 twinkle	 of	 the brighter	stars.	As	we	walked	to	the	barn,	I	heard	an	owl.	Mouse	was	standing	in

the	field.	We	walked	down	the	hill	and	into	the	barn.	Two	deer	stood	inside,	one

wearing	a	necktie.

“Thank	 you	 for	 coming,”	 I	 signed	 to	 the	 deer.	 I	 turned	 to	 Pearl.	 “They promised	to	come	tonight.”

“What? ”

“I	am	joking.”

Pearl	 grinned.	 “The	 deer	 are	 here	 because	 they	 smell	 food.	 Maybe	 that	 was Kieran’s	deer.	Someone	put	a	necktie	on	him.”

When	I	opened	the	feed	room	door,	the	deer	bolted	into	the	forest.	I	flipped	a

breaker	on	the	electric	panel,	which	I	had	installed	along	with	outlets,	switches, and	 lighting,	 powered	 by	 a	 cable	 from	 the	 house	 lying	 on	 the	 ground.	 Lights inside	and	outside	the	barn	came	to	life.

“Wonderful!”	Pearl	signed.	“It’s	so	bright!”

For	 the	 first	 time	 in	 the	 history	 of	 the	 world,	 light	 poured	 over	 this	 Bowen Island	hillside	at	night.





Men	Can’t	Be	Trusted

“Whisky	pushed	the	insulation	out	of	the	temporary	wall	downstairs	and	escaped

through	the	hole,”	Pearl	signed	when	I	came	home	from	work.

We	drove	around	the	property,	up	and	down	the	trunk	road,	and	up	and	down

the	side	roads	in	the	twilight,	searching	for	Whisky.

“I	 feel	 stupid	 shouting	 Whisky! 	 like	 I’m	 drunk.	 His	 tag	 has	 the	 telephone number.	We	must	wait	for	someone	to	call.”

No	 one	 called,	 so,	 in	 the	 morning,	 I	 called	 Bowen’s	 one-man	 police

detachment.	Constable	Laurent,	strikingly	handsome,	was	about	my	age.

“RCMP,”	said	Laurent.

“This	is	Derrick	King.	Our	German	Shepherd	ran	away	yesterday.	Have	you

seen	him?”

“Oh,	 he’s	 yours!	 He’s	 at	 the	 pound.	 Dogs	 aren’t	 allowed	 loose	 on	 Bowen Island.	 He	 chased	 my	 jeep	 along	 the	 trunk	 road,	 so	 I	 opened	 the	 door,	 and	 he jumped	 in.	 Whisky	 had	 a	 great	 time	 barking	 out	 the	 window,	 and	 he	 did	 me	 a favor:	 word	 is	 going	 around	 that	 the	 Bowen	 Island	 RCMP	 detachment	 has	 a police	dog.”

I	drove	to	North	Vancouver	and	bailed	Whisky	out	of	the	dog	pound.

When	I	returned,	Pearl	was	in	the	kitchen.

“I	 wanted	 to	 cook	 chicken	 pie,	 so	 I	 followed	 a	 recipe.	 I	 finished	 it,	 but	 the chicken	pieces	are	still	sitting	on	the	table.	I	don’t	understand	the	instructions.”

We	laughed,	and	I	helped	Pearl	to	rescue	the	meal.	She	could	not	understand

cooking	jargon	like	“reserve	broth.”

“Whisky’s	adventure	cost	$100.	I	have	no	cash	left.”

“Take	some	money	from	my	wallet.”

I	 went	 into	 the	 bedroom	 and	 took	 some	 money	 from	 Pearl’s	 wallet.	 While returning	her	wallet	to	her	handbag,	I	noticed	a	conversation	note	at	the	bottom.	I saw	 “danger”	 and	 “Derrick”	 on	 it.	 I	 heard	 her	 coming,	 so	 I	 put	 her	 handbag down	and	walked	out	of	the	room.

That	night	I	could	hardly	sleep,	wondering	why	she	had	written	those	words.

I	had	never	looked	in	her	bag	before,	and	I	expected	her	to	respect	my	privacy,

too.	 But,	 in	 the	 morning,	 while	 Pearl	 was	 in	 the	 bathroom,	 I	 looked	 in	 her handbag.

The	note	was	gone.

Late	on	Sunday	afternoon,	Frank	packed	his	tools,	but	he	approached	us	instead of	slipping	away.	He	told	us	our	house	was	substantially	complete,	so	we	were

ready	 to	 apply	 for	 our	 Certificate	 of	 Occupancy.	 He	 handed	 me	 the	 telephone number	of	the	inspector.

I	suggested	we	walk	around	to	make	a	list	of	the	incomplete	items,	but	Frank

refused,	 complaining	 that	 we’d	 been	 living	 in	 the	 house	 for	 weeks	 at	 his expense.	 I	 didn’t	 want	 to	 alarm	 the	 bank	 that	 held	 our	 second	 mortgage,	 so	 I agreed	to	call	the	inspector.	I	counted	on	him	to	identify	any	important	defects.

I	 left	 work	 early	 on	 inspection	 day.	 The	 inspector	 and	 Frank	 were	 standing outside	the	house,	and	Whisky	was	barking	inside	it.	I	was	astonished	when	the

inspector	handed	me	our	Certificate	of	Occupancy!	I	asked	how	he	could	do	that

when	 he	 hadn’t	 entered	 the	 house.	 He	 explained	 he	 had	 “dropped	 by	 a	 few times”	during	construction.	Frank	smiled.	They	left.

I	was	stunned.	I	needed	to	estimate	how	much	to	pay	Frank.	I	phoned	Ross,

apologized	 for	 not	 accepting	 his	 quotation,	 and	 asked	 him	 for	 a	 quote	 to complete	Frank’s	work.	He	agreed	to	come	that	evening.	I	picked	Pearl	up	from

the	ferry	and	updated	her.

When	Ross	arrived,	he	looked	around	and	whistled	a	single	note.	“The	walls

have	 to	 come	 down.”	 He	 tapped	 the	 wall	 near	 the	 ceiling, poked	 his	 finger through	it,	and	laughed.	“Air!	Frank	didn’t	lift	the	wallboards	up	before	nailin’m down,	so	they	don’t	support	the	ceiling!	In	six	months,	the	edges	are	goin’	to	be hangin’	down	wavy-like.	And	then	you	can	rip	the	walls	 and	the	ceiling	off.”

Pearl	 was	 furious;	 I	 couldn’t	 tell	 if	 she	 was	 furious	 with	 Frank	 or	 with	 me.

Ross	 showed	 us	 Frank’s	 shortcuts,	 errors,	 and	 frauds	 as	 we	 walked	 around	 the house.	 He	 had	 ruined	 the	 vapor	 shields,	 which	 is	 why	 our	 skylights	 dripped water.	He	had	put	four-inch	door	frames	into	six-inch	walls,	so	we	had	to	replace all	 the	 exterior	 frames.	 He	 had	 used	 interior	 doors	 on	 the	 exterior;	 they	 had	 no sills,	which	is	why	we	had	seen	mice.	Ross	walked	into	the	kitchen,	looked	at	the range	hood,	and	showed	us	how	it	dangled	from	a	few	screws.

“I	smell	sewage.	Let’s	go	outside.”

We	walked	around	the	house,	and	Ross	looked	up.	“There	are	no	roof	vents	as

required	by	building	code.”

“The	inspector	didn’t	even	have	to	go	inside	to	see	this	fault!	Why	didn’t	he

do	his	job?”

“Good	question.	Where’s	the	attic	hatch?”

We	went	into	the	bedroom.	Ross	took	my	flashlight,	climbed	the	ladder,	and

disappeared	into	the	attic.	He	reappeared	a	few	minutes	later.

“Frank’s	vented	the	septic,	the	range	hood,	and	bathroom	into	your	attic!	And

he	 nailed	 your	 ceiling	 boards	 straight	 to	 the	 trusses!	 Because	 he	 didn’t	 use

strapping,	 your	 wallboards	 have	 that	 gap	 at	 the	 top,	 and	 your	 ceiling	 is	 never goin’	to	be	flat.	And	he	used	half-inch	wallboard	for	the	ceiling,	not	five-eighths ceiling	 board.	 You’re	 stuck	 with	 it	 now.	 Get	 Franco	 to	 spray	 your	 ceiling	 with spackle.	 Your	 home	 will	 look	 like	 a	 Greek	 restaurant,	 but	 you	 won’t	 see	 the waves	in	the	ceiling.”

We	walked	down	to	the	basement,	and	Ross	roared	with	laughter.	“Where’d

he	get	that	water	tank?	From	a	 trailer? ”	He	traced	the	pipes	with	the	flashlight beam.	 “Your	 pipes	 run	 through	 the	 attic!	 They’re	 gonna	 freeze!	 They’ll	 wreck the	house	if	you’re	not	home	to	shut	off	the	water.	He	built	a	time	bomb.”

“I	watched	him	do	it.	I	didn’t	know	it	was	wrong.”

“It	smells	worse	down	here	than	in	your	attic.	Dig	that	up,”	he	said,	pointing

to	the	septic	pipe.	I	dug	it	up.	Ross	pointed	at	a	hole	in	the	foundation	behind	the drainpipe	and	shouted.	 “The	bastard’s	cut	 off	your	foundation	 drain!	He’s	used that	drainpipe	for	your	septic,	so	rainwater	drains	into	your	basement!	The	other foundation	drainpipes	flow	into	your	septic	tank,	so	rainwater	will	flush	sewage

into	your	disposal	field	and	ruin	it.”

We	 walked	 outside	 again.	 Ross	 pointed	 to	 the	 mound	 behind	 the	 house.	 He told	 me	 to	 dig,	 but	 I	 hardly	 had	 to	 dig	 to	 uncover	 the	 fiberglass	 septic	 tank.

“Your	 tank	 is	 tilted	 twenty	 degrees!	 You	 need	 to	 dig	 it	 up	 and	 put	 it	 down straight	and	connect	it	to	the	right	pipe.”	He	traced	the	flashlight	beam	along	a line	 of	 plastic	 pipes	 scattered	 down	 the	 slope	 from	 the	 house	 to	 the	 garden.

“Frank	didn’t	glue	your	septic	pipes.	Sewage	is	pouring	down	the	hillside.	You

know	what?	I’d	say	your	house	isn’t	fit	to	live	in.”

“How	much	to	make	it	fit	to	live	in?”

“Ten	 or	 twenty	 grand.	 You’ll	 have	 to	 dig	 up	 and	 tear	 down	 and	 buy	 new things	 and	 put	 things	 back.	 You	 can’t	 reuse	 anything	 except	 the	 septic	 tank.	 I won’t	do	it.	I	don’t	want	to	get	involved.	Sue	the	bastard.	It’s	a	good	thing	you only	hired	Frank	for	 half	your	house.”

I	don’t	think	Pearl	ever	looked	at	me	the	same	way	again.	I	wrote	down	the

defects.	 The	 bank	 needed	 another	 appraisal	 before	 it	 would	 make	 its	 final advance,	so	Frank	had	a	few	more	weekends	to	finish	whatever	he	might	deign

to	finish.

The	final	appraisal	for	the	bank	was	issued.	Frank’s	most	expensive	defects	were

not	 obvious,	 so	 the	 appraisal	 was	 high	 enough	 for	 me	 to	 draw	 the	 rest	 of	 the mortgage.

On	Sunday	afternoon,	Frank	and	his	son	installed	windowsills.	At	the	end	of

the	day,	Frank	asked	for	the	balance	of	the	contract	price.	I	asked	them	to	finish the	 rest	 of	 the	 work	 before	 they	 asked	 for	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 money.	 Frank	 replied

that	the	Certificate	of	Occupancy	was	proof	that	the	work	was	complete,	so	they would	do	no	more	work	and	had	to	be	paid	in	full.	They	gathered	all	their	tools

and	left.

I	went	to	see	Clifford,	a	lawyer,	the	next	day.	He	said,	“You	shouldn’t	have

signed	 this.	 It’s	 with	 a	 shell	 company,	 so	 you	 can’t	 sue	 him.	 It	 doesn’t	 say	 the work	must	comply	with	building	codes	or	that	materials	must	be	new.	It	doesn’t

give	 a	 completion	 date.	 It	 doesn’t	 give	 any	 remedies	 when	 something	 goes wrong.	The	only	deliverable	is	a	Certificate	of	Occupancy,	so	just	by	getting	one, you’ve	accepted	completion.	You	can’t	let	him	come	this	far	and	then	announce

it’s	all	no	good.	Pay	him	now,	and	get	it	over	with.”

Pearl	and	I	had	dinner	at	the	Snuggler	and	discussed	this	disaster.	If	we	gave

Frank	the	rest	of	the	money,	we	would	have	no	money	to	repair	his	work.	The

more	we	talked,	the	more	furious	we	became.	We	knew	Clifford	was	right,	but

we	 ignored	 his	 advice.	 We	 drove	 home.	 I	 telephoned	 Frank	 and	 told	 him	 we expected	him	to	finish	his	work.	Frank	said	nothing.

An	 hour	 later,	 Frank	 arrived	 with	 his	 wife,	 both	 sons,	 and	 his	 baby.	 We	 sat around	the	table.	With	a	smile,	Frank	said	that	his	work	was	complete	because

we	 had	 moved	 in	 six	 weeks	 ago,	 we	 had	 received	 a	 Certificate	 of	 Occupancy, and	 we	 must	 have	 received	 an	 appraisal	 of	 the	 value	 his	 work	 added	 to	 our house.	He	demanded	to	be	paid	in	full.

I	reminded	Frank	that	he	and	his	wife	had	asked	us	 not	to	move	in	because	he was	 behind	 schedule.	 I	 asked	 them	 to	 walk	 around	 the	 house	 to	 agree	 on	 the defects	 before	 we	 agreed	 on	 the	 amount.	 He	 refused,	 so	 I	 reported	 the	 defects Ross	had	identified.

Frank’s	reply	to	every	defect	was	“you	wanted	it	like	that”	or	“you	accepted

that”	or	“the	inspector	approved	that”	or	“that	was	your	responsibility.”

Pearl	wrote	notes	to	Mrs.	Schutt,	who	refused	to	look	at	them.

I	 told	 him	 a	 contractor	 estimated	 the	 cost	 of	 completion	 to	 be	 $10,000	 to $20,000.	I	asked	Frank	if	he	planned	to	finish	the	work.

He	said,	“Are	you	saying	you	are	not	allowing	me	to	finish?	Are	you	saying	I

can’t	come	back?”

I	said	that	we	expected	him	to	finish	the	work,	and	we	were	not	going	to	pay

him	 for	 unfinished	 work.	 I	 wrote	 a	 check	 for	 $14,000,	 which	 was	 the	 $24,000

contract	 price	 less	 a	 holdback	 of	 $10,000.	 Frank	 took	 the	 check	 and	 stood	 to leave.	 Mrs.	 Schutt	 tried	 to	 take	 Pearl’s	 notepaper,	 but	 Pearl	 held	 it.	 They	 left without	another	word.

That	 night,	 the	 sound	 of	 the	 water	 dripping	 from	 the	 bedroom	 skylight	 onto our	plastic	bed	sheet	kept	me	awake.

In	the	morning,	I	called	Clifford	and	updated	him.

“You’ve	 just	 eliminated	 any	 incentive	 for	 Frank	 to	 work.	 Because homeowners	 use	 quality	 as	 an	 excuse	 not	 to	 pay,	 the	 law	 is	 biased	 in	 favor	 of builders,	 and	 Frank	 knows	 this.	 He’ll	 lien	 your	 house	 and	 use	 a	 collection agency.	He’ll	stop	 working,	but	he	won’t	stop	 collecting.	Stop	your	check!”

I	rushed	to	the	bank,	but	I	was	too	late;	Frank	must	have	deposited	it	as	soon

as	 the	 bank	 opened.	 Frank	 had	 let	 us	 down	 through	 shoddy	 work,	 but	 I	 had	 to live	with	the	pain	of	letting	Pearl	down	through	shoddy	decision-making.

Until	 the	 stalemate	 was	 resolved,	 Pearl	 and	 I	 avoided	 touching	 any	 part	 of	 the house	for	which	Frank	was	responsible—which	was	most	of	it.	Meanwhile,	we

improved	the	property	and	the	barn.

On	a	weekend	morning,	outdoors,	I	picked	up	my	electric	saw.	The	weather

was	 getting	 warmer,	 so	 I	 didn’t	 wear	 gloves.	 I	 felt	 my	 hand	 tingle.	 I	 wet	 a fingertip	 and	 touched	 the	 saw.	 Electricity	 shot	 up	 my	 arm!	 I	 drove	 to	 the Building	 Centre	 to	 buy	 a	 tester.	 When	 I	 plugged	 it	 into	 the	 outlet,	 the	 red UNGROUNDED	lamp	glowed.

Pearl	 and	 I	 tested	 the	 other	 outlets.	 All	 were	 ungrounded;	 the	 wiring	 of	 the whole	house	was	unsafe!	I	opened	the	electric	panel—there	was	no	ground	wire.

I	 searched	 outside	 for	 the	 ground	 rod,	 and	 I	 felt	 sick	 to	 realize	 that	 this	 basic safety	 component	 had	 never	 been	 installed	 and	 that	 the	 house	 had	 passed inspection	 without	 it.	 All	 the	 inspector	 had	 to	 do	 was	 plug	 a	 tester	 into	 any outlet,	but	he	had	done	nothing.	Frank	had	put	us	at	risk	of	electrocution	to	save himself	 an	 hour’s	 work,	 but	 because	 he	 had	 told	 me	 to	 tell	 the	 inspector	 that	 I had	done	the	work,	I	couldn’t	report	it	now.	The	scam	was	perfect.

I	installed	a	ground	rod	and	connected	it.	The	tester	reported	the	outlets	were

safe.

“I	 checked	 our	 property	 registration	 today	 at	 the	 Land	 Title	 Office.	 There	 are three	liens	on	our	property	title,	from	Astra	Trading	Company,	Dick’s	Building

Supplies,	and	Frank’s	son—for	unpaid	wages!”

“Bullshit.	What	next?”

“They	expire	after	one	year.	We	need	to	preserve	his	work	for	one	year,	so	if

he	sues	us	we	will	still	have	the	evidence	of	what	he	did.	We	will	fix	his	work

only	where	necessary.”

“We’re	 stuck!	 We	 can’t	 go	 forward	 and	 finish	 the	 house.	 We	 can’t	 go	 back and	change	builders.	We	must	win!”

“Yes.	We	need	that	$10,000	from	Frank	to	repair	his	work.”

“So	…	no	kids	yet,”	signed	Pearl	with	a	sigh.

“A	year	is	not	long,	and	we	both	know	it	would	be	wrong	to	bring	a	baby	into

this	mess.	But	we	will	not	waste	that	year.	We	can	landscape	and	finish	the	barn and	fence.	First,	we	must	get	the	septic	system	reinstalled.”

“And	change	the	locks	so	Frank	can’t	get	in.”

Because	 I	 worked	 for	 a	 bank,	 I	 could	 access	 Frank’s	 credit	 record,	 which	 I should	have	done	before	signing	his	contract.	I	found	he	never	paid	his	bills	on

time.	Leo	checked	Frank’s	police	record	for	me.	He	had	no	criminal	record	but

dozens	of	unpaid	parking	fines.

I	 made	 an	 appointment	 with	 Bowen’s	 drainage	 specialist	 and	 rented	 a	 pump	 to drain	the	septic	tank.	Once	again,	we	lived	like	hillbillies,	using	the	outhouse	and showering	outdoors	in	cold	water.

The	specialist	reported	the	tank	was	sitting	on	a	rock,	and	the	rock	had	broken

through	it,	so	it	was	seeping	sewage	into	the	soil.	The	specialist	hoisted	the	tank with	 his	 backhoe	 and	 washed	 it.	 I	 repaired	 the	 foundation	 drain	 that	 Frank	 had damaged.	 The	 specialist	 patched	 the	 tank,	 dug	 a	 new	 hole	 with	 his	 backhoe, reinterred	 the	 tank,	 and	 connected	 it	 to	 the	 correct	 pipe.	 Now	 we	 had	 running water	again.

I	noticed	that	the	water	pump	was	starting	and	stopping,	indicating	a	leak	in

the	 plumbing.	 Pearl	 held	 the	 lamp	 while	 I	 crawled	 into	 the	 crawlspace	 and checked	the	air	pressure	in	the	water	tank.	It	was	low.	Using	Pearl’s	scuba	tank,	I added	 air—and	 heard	 it	 gurgling	 into	 the	 pipes.	 The	 water	 tank	 Frank	 had supplied	was	broken	and	unrepairable.	I	installed	a	new	tank	and	saved	Frank’s

for	evidence.

Working	as	a	team,	it	took	us	a	month	of	evenings	and	weekends	to	repair	the

ceiling	edges.	We	couldn’t	afford	to	replace	the	walls	as	Ross	had	suggested,	so

we	patched	the	ceiling	edges	by	inserting	strips	of	drywall	in	the	gaps	at	the	tops of	the	walls	and	by	attaching	strapping	to	the	ceiling	edges	in	the	attic.	The	work was	so	dusty	that	when	we	pulled	off	our	respirators	and	goggles,	we	looked	like

raccoons.

The	 ceiling	 repairs	 had	 to	 be	 meticulously	 planned	 and	 executed	 because, when	one	of	us	was	in	the	attic,	communication	stopped.	Even	a	dropped	screw

halted	 work.	 When	 I	 was	 below,	 I	 could	 flash	 the	 light	 to	 get	 Pearl’s	 attention, and	Pearl	could	bang	on	a	ceiling	truss	to	get	mine.	But	when	Pearl	was	below,

there	was	no	way	for	me	to	get	her	attention,	so	Pearl	did	most	of	the	miserable

attic	work.

I	 made	 a	 photo	 album	 of	 Frank’s	 work	 and	 took	 it	 to	 Dick’s	 Building

Supplies.	 The	 manager	 was	 appalled	 by	 the	 photos	 and	 passed	 them	 around	 to his	 staff.	 He	 said,	 “This	 is	 the	 worst	 craftsmanship	 I’ve	 ever	 seen.	 I’ll	 remove our	lien	and	recover	our	debt	from	Frank.	And	that’s	the	end	of	his	discount.”

Pearl	was	reassigned	to	an	earlier	shift	by	the	post	office.	Now	I	drove	Pearl	to the	 ferry,	 did	 the	 morning	 chores,	 and	 left	 an	 hour	 later	 than	 she	 did.	 At	 night, Pearl	arrived	home	first,	did	the	evening	chores,	prepared	dinner,	and	picked	me

up	in	the	truck	an	hour	later.	Our	joint	commutes	stopped,	and	distance	began	to

creep	into	our	relationship.

We	bought	two	tons	of	hay	from	Fernie’s	farm,	where	Ralph	had	lived.	It	was

more	 than	 we	 needed	 to	 feed	 one	 horse,	 two	 goats,	 and	 four	 sheep	 over	 the winter,	 but	 our	 prospects	 for	 boarding	 another	 horse	 looked	 good.	 Alan,	 Rose, Pearl,	and	I	spent	a	day	at	hard	labor	loading	the	hay	onto	our	blue	truck,	three overloaded	 truckloads	 of	 it,	 and	 hoisting	 each	 bale	 into	 our	 hayloft	 using	 a block-and-tackle.

Pearl	and	I	drove	to	the	General	Store	for	groceries.	Pearl	browsed	the	notices

on	the	bulletin	board	outside.	“Look	at	this:	free	kittens.	We’ll	keep	them	in	the barn.	They’ll	get	milk	and	have	friends.	A	barn	is	cat	heaven.”	We	drove	to	see

the	litter	and	adopted	both	kittens.

When	 I	 came	 home	 on	 the	 ferry,	 Pearl	 wasn’t	 at	 the	 terminal	 to	 greet	 me.	 I waited	until	most	cars	had	disembarked,	and	then	I	hitchhiked	home.	Our	truck

was	parked	by	the	house.	I	changed	and	went	to	the	barn	to	do	the	chores.	The

lights	were	on,	but	only	the	goats	and	kittens	greeted	me.	Mouse	and	Pearl	were

missing.

Half	an	hour	later,	Pearl	stormed	into	the	house.

“Where	were	you?	I	was	worried.”

“I	 arrived	 home,	 changed	 clothes,	 prepared	 the	 milking	 kit,	 and	 went	 to	 the barn.	 Mouse	 was	 gone!	 I	 walked	 to	 the	 lake	 to	 look	 for	 him,	 holding	 the flashlight	in	front	of	my	face,	scanning	the	beam,	looking	for	eye	reflections.	I saw	 deer	 eyes	 but	 no	 horse	 eyes.	 I	 walked	 to	 the	 trunk	 road.	 Then	 I	 walked west,”	 she	 signed.	 “Mow	 …	 Mow,”	 she	 said	 with	 her	 voice.	 “I	 called	 Mouse’s name.	I	reached	the	big	house	with	grass.	Mouse	was	grazing!	I	held	his	halter

and	walked	him	home,	two	kilometers.	The	flashlight	batteries	died.	The	moon

turned	 the	 road	 into	 a	 black	 ribbon	 under	 the	 stars.	 I	 hate	 walking	 in	 the	 dark because	 I	 am	 deaf	 and	 blind.	 We	 have	 no	 fence—and	 you	 want	 to	 board	 a horse!”

She	put	her	face	in	her	hands	and	sobbed.

I	put	my	hands	on	her	shoulders.

Pearl	looked	up	as	if	nothing	had	happened.

“I	have	blisters.	Gumboots	are	bad	for	long	walks.	We	must	finish	the	upper

fence.”

The	telephone	rang.	It	was	Gus.

“Ludd	called	me.	He’s	got	the	only	lawn	on	the	island,	and	Mouse	was	eating it!	If	it	happens	again,	no	one’s	ever	gonna	board	a	horse	at	your	place.	Electrify that	string!	Leave	a	radio	on!	Leave	a	light	on!	Finish	your	fence! Unnerstand? ”

My	father	came	to	help	build	the	upper	field	fence.	He	and	I	held	each	fencepost

in	position	while	Eddie’s	backhoe	pounded	it	down.	A	dozen	poles	hit	bedrock,

so	 we	 set	 them	 in	 concrete.	 We	 built	 gates	 and	 corner	 braces,	 ready	 to	 support the	wire.

Rainy	 weekend	 after	 rainy	 weekend,	 Pearl	 and	 I	 strung	 barbed	 wire.	 When the	 wire	 was	 strung,	 we	 nailed	 insulators	 to	 the	 poles	 and	 strung	 electric	 fence wire	 inside	 the	 barbed	 wire.	 Our	 work	 clothes	 were	 hung	 by	 the	 woodstove	 at night,	where	they	developed	a	smoky	aroma	like	Lapsang	Suchong	tea.

When	the	fence	was	complete,	we	opened	the	barn	door.	Mouse	and	the	goats

walked	out,	cantered	about,	and	grazed.

Whisky	 annoyed	 the	 goats,	 so	 I	 tethered	 him	 while	 we	 dismantled	 the

temporary	fence.	In	a	few	minutes,	I	heard	yelping.	He	lay	curled	in	a	ball,	his

paws	over	his	head,	cringing	as	the	goats	butted	him.	We	laughed	as	we	pulled

the	goats	away	and	untied	Whisky.	He	never	annoyed	the	goats	again.

Pearl	and	I	registered	Trout	Lake	Farm	as	a	partnership	and	opened	a	Trout	Lake

Farm	bank	account.	I	set	up	business	accounting	in	a	portable	computer	from	my

office,	weighing	eight	kilograms	and	costing	$5,000.

I	 resumed	 MBA	 classes,	 sleeping	 on	 my	 sister’s	 floor	 twice	 a	 week.	 Pearl insisted	 I	 continue,	 despite	 the	 distance	 to	 the	 university	 and	 our	 projects	 on Bowen.	To	prepare	for	my	encounter	with	Frank	on	the	first	night	of	the	term,	I

brought	the	photo	album	of	his	work,	but	Frank	had	dropped	out.

As	 the	 days	 grew	 cooler,	 the	 spiders	 multiplied.	 We	 developed	 the	 habit	 of holding	 an	 arm	 in	 front	 of	 our	 face	 while	 walking	 to	 the	 barn	 to	 break	 the cobwebs	 that	 the	 spiders	 had	 erected	 overnight—the	 “Bowen	 Island	 salute.”

Mushrooms	appeared	overnight.	The	aromas	of	field	and	forest,	horse	sweat	and

manure,	and	even	creosote—we	loved	all	of	them.	Never	did	either	of	us	need	to

encourage	 the	 other	 to	 do	 chores.	 Even	 in	 the	 rain,	 we	 enjoyed	 walking	 up	 the hill	and	down	to	the	barn	and	climbing	the	ladder	into	the	loft,	breathing	lungfuls of	 crisp	 air,	 and	 enjoying	 the	 companionship	 of	 our	 animals.	 We	 loved	 giving carrots	to	the	horse	and	banana	peels	to	the	goats.	We	loved	surprises	like	a	deer in	the	field	or	an	eagle	overhead.

The	 cats	 learned	 that	 milk	 was	 associated	 with	 goats,	 but	 jumping	 onto	 the milking	stand	was	associated	with	blows	to	the	nose.	So	at	milking	time,	they	sat just	 beyond	 reach,	 their	 tails	 curled	 around	 them.	 We	 squirted	 streams	 of	 milk

into	 their	 mouths,	 slowly	 raising	 the	 streams	 higher	 until	 the	 cats	 walked	 like Orwell’s	pigs.

We	ate	cheese	with	every	meal.	We	ate	 horiatiki	salads	with	cheese.	We	ate pizza,	 pasta,	 grilled-cheese	 sandwiches,	 and	 spinach-and-cheese	 pie.	 We	 made cheesecake.	Yet	our	refrigerator	slowly	filled	with	cheese.

“We	 need	 to	 buy	 a	 freezer,”	 signed	 Pearl.	 “If	 we	 don’t	 buy	 a	 freezer,	 then	 I want	 a	 washer	 and	 a	 dryer.	 I	 don’t	 like	 sitting	 in	 the	 laundromat	 in	 West Vancouver	with	strange	people.”

As	the	days	grew	colder,	the	goats	produced	less	milk,	and	the	tide	of	frozen

cheese	began	to	ebb.	We	bought	the	washer	and	dryer.

Pearl	brought	our	mail	home	from	the	post	office	box.	A	letter	to	me	had	been

opened.

“It’s	from	my	pen-pal	in	Madrid.	She	was	helping	me	with	my	Spanish.	Why

is	the	envelope	open?”

“I	opened	it.”

“Why?	It’s	in	Spanish.”

“I	asked	a	woman	at	work	to	translate	it.	How	can	I	know	what	you	are	doing

if	I	don’t	check?”

“You	have	to	 trust.	Without	trust,	no	marriage	can	survive.”

“But	so	many	men	can’t	be	trusted.	Every	day,	tell	me	what	you	did	so	I	don’t

guess.”

If	Pearl	had	been	hearing,	I	would	not	have	forgiven	her	for	opening	my	mail,

but	because	she	was	deaf,	I	excused	her	occasional	surveillance.

“Let’s	buy	another	TTY	for	my	office	so	you	can	call	me	at	work.”

Pearl	kissed	me.	“That	will	help.”

As	 winter	 approached,	 the	 air	 became	 rich	 with	 the	 scent	 of	 fallen	 leaves.	 The rain	grew	heavier,	the	darkness	grew	blacker,	and	the	wind	grew	stronger.

“Ugh,”	Pearl	mumbled	in	the	kitchen.	“I	found	mouse	shit	in	the	oven	mitts!

The	cold	weather	is	making	the	mice	come	inside.	Please	buy	some	mousetraps.”

I	 drove	 to	 the	 General	 Store	 and	 bought	 mousetraps.	 I	 baited	 them	 with cheese	and	scattered	them	around	the	basement.

“Keep	Whisky	inside	our	room	tonight	so	he	doesn’t	eat	the	cheese,”	signed

Pearl.

“Good	idea,	but	if	he	tries,	he’ll	only	eat	from	one	mousetrap.”

That	night	as	we	lay	in	bed,	I	heard	the	crackles	and	pops	of	the	woodstove

punctuated	by	mousetrap	snaps.	In	the	morning,	I	reported,	“Six	pieces	of	cheese

eaten.	One	dead	mouse.”

I	called	an	exterminator,	discussed	the	problem,	and	ordered	a	Katch-All	from him.	He	delivered	the	mousetrap	to	my	office,	to	the	amusement	of	our	staff.	He

placed	a	steel	box	on	the	reception	counter	and	turned	the	key	on	its	side	a	few

times.	“This	is	the	best	trap	ever	invented.	No	bait.	Just	wind	it	up.	Mice	like	to crawl	 through	 this	 little	 tube.	 When	 they	 do,	 they	 get	 flipped	 into	 a	 cage,	 like this.”	He	touched	the	tube.	The	mechanism	rotated	like	a	revolver	cylinder,	and	a new	tube	snapped	into	place.

I	brought	the	Katch-All	home	and	put	it	in	the	basement.	That	night,	I	heard

the	crackles	and	pops	of	the	woodstove	punctuated	by	 kaching! 	…	 kaching! 	 …

kaching!

In	 the	 morning,	 half	 a	 dozen	 mice	 huddled	 inside.	 We	 did	 the	 chores.	 Then we	 put	 the	 Katch-All	 outside	 the	 barn	 door	 and	 opened	 the	 lid.	 The	 mice scattered	across	the	field,	screaming.	The	cats	ran	after	one	mouse,	then	another, but	because	they	failed	to	focus	on	one	target,	all	the	mice	escaped.

Each	 morning,	 I	 carried	 the	 nightly	 collection	 of	 mice	 to	 the	 barn	 and released	them,	to	the	delight	of	the	cats.	In	a	week,	the	Katch-All	was	silent.

Pearl	 brought	 home	 a	 book, A	 Pictorial	 History	 of	 Boxing.	 “I	 heard	 my	 great-grandfather	 was	 a	 famous	 boxer.	 I	 want	 to	 look	 at	 the	 pictures	 to	 find	 one	 that looks	like	my	father.”

“Ask	your	mother	what	she	knows	about	him.”

“Mother	 will	 not	 discuss	 him.	 And	 she	 doesn’t	 show	 my	 father’s	 birth

certificate	 to	 me.	 I	 told	 you	 the	 police	 never	 decided	 who	 caused	 the	 accident.

She	doesn’t	show	me	all	his	papers,	so	she	is	hiding	something.”

“What	do	your	brother	and	sisters	know	about	this?”

“They’re	 not	 interested.	 They	 accept	 Mother’s	 stories.”	 Pearl	 opened	 the bottom	drawer	in	the	kitchen	cabinet	and	pulled	out	some	clippings.	“This	is	all	I have.”

“These	are	newspaper	stories	about	that	accident.	I	can’t	believe	your	mother

is	a	killer,	but	I	will	help	you	find	the	truth.”

“Will	you	help	me	with	my	research?”

“Yes.”	I	kissed	her.

“Your	kiss	feels	like	shocks.	Sometimes,	I	am	worried	about	our	relationship.

We	make	love	less	often.	I	feel	like	you	are	in	love	with	the	house,	not	me.”

“I	love	you	both.	Without	a	house,	there	is	no	place	for	a	family,	and	without

a	family,	there	is	no	need	for	a	house.	Maybe	I	should	quit	school.”

“Don’t	quit.	Your	MBA	will	support	the	security	of	our	family.”

It	 was	 impossible	 for	 me	 to	 come	 home	 on	 class	 nights,	 except	 on	 the expensive	water	taxi,	so,	twice	a	week,	my	sister	gave	me	bedroll	space	on	her

living	room	floor	while	Pearl	did	double	chores.	Over	the	next	two	years,	with Pearl’s	constant	encouragement,	I	would	complete	my	MBA.

The	power	failed.	I	lit	the	kerosene	lamp,	and	we	warmed	our	hands	from	it

as	the	kitchen	filled	with	the	homey	smell	of	kerosene.

“Another	wet	day,”	Pearl	signed.	“We	must	clean	the	roof,	but	can	we	wait	until

the	roof	is	dry?”

“We	need	to	clean	the	gutters	while	the	roof	is	damp.	Dry	cedar	splits	when

stepped	on.	But	wet	cedar	is	slippery,	so	we	must	be	careful	when	we	go	up.”

We	put	on	our	working	clothes	and	water-resistant	coats.	I	set	the	stepladder

in	front	of	the	house	where	the	roof	was	only	one	story	high	and	steadied	it	on

the	 uneven	 soil.	 Pearl	 climbed	 up,	 and	 I	 crawled	 up	 after	 her.	 We	 worked	 in opposite	directions	around	the	edge	of	the	roof,	sitting	and	facing	outwards	with our	 feet	 in	 the	 gutters.	 Scuttling	 sideways	 like	 crabs,	 we	 pulled	 handfuls	 of leaves,	needles,	and	twigs	out	of	the	gutters	and	dropped	them	over	the	edge.

Two	hours	later,	we	were	reunited.	I	held	Pearl’s	hand	as	she	lowered	a	foot

over	the	eve	and	set	it	on	the	ladder.	Gripping	the	gutter	with	the	other	hand,	she put	her	other	foot	on	the	first	step	of	the	ladder	and	started	to	step	down.

The	ladder	buckled	and	collapsed.

I	looked	down	helplessly	as	Pearl	crashed.	She	lay	on	the	ladder	on	her	back,

motionless.	After	a	minute,	she	signed,	“I	broke	my	hip.	Come	down.	Help	me.”

“How?	I	have	no	way	to	get	down	and	no	way	to	call	for	help.	Check	your

spine—wiggle	your	toes.”

“Jump	down.	Help	me,	please.	Please!”

“I’ll	break	my	legs!	How	will	that	help?”

“If	you	love	me,	come	down	and	help	me.”

“I	can’t!	You	need	to	go	to	the	phone	and	call	for	help.	We	could	sit	for	days

in	the	rain	before	anyone	comes.”

Pearl	glared	at	me.

“The	ladder	twisted	slowly,	so	I	don’t	think	your	hip	is	broken.	Wiggle	your

toes!”

Pearl	rocked	one	boot	back	and	forth,	then	the	other.	She	stood	up	and	threw

her	cap	on	the	ground.

“The	 sawhorses	 are	 there.	 Drag	 them	 below	 me.	 Put	 some	 wood	 across	 the top.	I	will	try	to	climb	down.”

Pearl	did	so,	and	I	lowered	myself	from	the	roof.	We	walked	into	the	house

and	 hung	 our	 soaking	 wet	 clothes	 by	 the	 woodstove.	 I	 added	 more	 wood	 and opened	 the	 flue	 and	 grate.	 We	 stood	 with	 our	 hands	 to	 the	 stove	 without communicating.	When	we	felt	warmer,	we	went	upstairs.

Pearl	 sat	 limply	 in	 a	 kitchen	 chair.	 “Why	 do	 you	 always	 have	 to	 be	 right?

Being	right	adds	stress	to	relationships.”

I	 heard	 fum— fum—Fum—FUM	 thundering	 through	 the	 floor.	 I	 ran

downstairs	 with	 Pearl.	 The	 woodstove	 was	 red	 hot,	 and	 through	 its	 open	 grill, flames	flashed	yellow	light	on	the	woodpile.	The	chimney	was	chugging	like	a

steam	 locomotive,	 its	 flue	 thermometer	 pegged	 to	 the	 end	 of	 the	 scale.	 The sawdust	 on	 the	 dirt	 floor	 near	 the	 stove	 was	 on	 fire,	 ignited	 by	 the	 radiation.	 I shut	the	damper	and	grill	while	Pearl	stamped	out	the	embers.	The	heat	scorched

our	legs.	Pearl	wiped	the	sweat	from	her	face,	her	bruises	temporarily	forgotten.

The	stove	groaned	as	it	cooled.

“You	 could	 have	 burned	 down	 the	 house.	 Hearies	 are	 careless	 because	 they depend	on	hearing.	Deafies	do	not	make	careless	mistakes.”

Pearl’s	 prejudiced	 logic	 reversed	 cause	 and	 effect.	 We	 had	 just	 made	 a careless	mistake	together,	and	my	hearing	had	saved	our	house.

“It’s	not	raining	today,	but	water	is	running	down	the	walls.”

I	 looked	 at	 the	 windows	 closely.	 “Frank	 installed	 half	 the	 windows	 upside down,	so	half	the	window	drains	are	at	the	top	instead	of	the	bottom!	We	can’t

fix	this	ourselves,	but	we	have	to	fix	it	soon	or	the	walls	will	be	damaged.”

“I	 am	 so	 pissed	 off.	 I	 have	 to	 sort	 mail	 so	 we	 can	 build	 a	 house	 twice.

Meanwhile,	I	get	older.”

Ross	 was	 busy	 with	 other	 work,	 so	 I	 called	 Jesse,	 whom	 Rokus	 had

recommended.	Jesse	arrived	with	his	dog,	tied	his	hair	in	a	rubber	band,	rolled	a cigarette,	and	followed	Pearl	and	me	on	a	tour	of	the	house.

“No	one	ever	hired	me	to	rotate	windows.	I’ll	need	scaffolding.	While	it’s	up,

I	should	install	your	missing	soffits	and	siding,	or	you’ll	have	starlings	in	your attic	come	spring.”

Jesse	set	up	shop	in	the	unfinished	side	of	the	house.	He	soon	had	more	bad

news.

“Frank	didn’t	stain	your	siding.	I	know	he	left	it	to	you	to	stain	the	outside,

but	it’ll	curl	if	you	only	stain	one	side.	While	I’ve	got	scaffolding	up,	I	should remove	the	siding	from	your	 entire	house,	stain	it	on	both	sides,	and	put	it	back up.”

It	 was	 hard	 to	 imagine	 building	 a	 house	 more	 inefficiently	 than	 we	 did	 by trying	to	save	money.	While	our	windows	were	missing,	and	plastic	was	stapled

over	 the	 holes,	 the	 woodstove	 burned	 firewood	 at	 a	 tremendous	 rate,	 yet	 the house	was	always	cold.	We	wore	T-shirts	to	bed	instead	of	sleeping	nude,	and	we

brought	our	next-day’s	clothing	into	bed	and	slept	next	to	it	to	pre-warm	it.

The	bathroom	became	our	haven	for	warmth,	relaxing,	and	signing.	The	baths

we	took	together	grew	longer	to	delay	walking	out	into	the	chill,	but,	gradually, Pearl	started	getting	in	after	I	got	in,	to	let	me	warm	up	the	bathroom.	Little	by little,	I	started	getting	out	before	she	got	out,	for	there	were	many	tasks	for	me	to do.	Eventually,	Pearl	got	in	after	I	got	out,	recycling	the	hot	bathwater,	and	our baths	together	ceased.

“You’ve	changed,”	signed	Pearl,	in	bed.	“You	don’t	sign	as	much.	I	don’t	know

what	you	are	thinking.”

“Can	you	get	day-shift	again	so	we	can	commute	together?”

“It’s	impossible	because	of	union	rules	and	my	low	seniority.”

I	lit	the	kerosene	lamp	and	turned	off	the	electric	light.

“You	have	friends	in	the	post	office	to	talk	to.”

“We	work	with	our	hands—how	to	talk?	We	are	only	allowed	to	sign	during

breaks.	Hearies	can	talk	while	they	work.”

“You	need	to	make	more	friends	here.”

“Few	 hearies	 want	 deafie	 friends.	 When	 I	 have	 a	 baby	 and	 stop	 working, there	will	be	no	one	to	sign	to	me	until	our	baby	can	sign.”

Today,	 it	 is	 hard	 to	 imagine	 the	 time	 when	 most	 people	 had	 no	 electronic contact	other	than	a	fixed-line	telephone.

“You	will	make	many	friends	when	our	baby	goes	to	kindergarten.”

Pearl	rolled	over,	buried	her	face	in	the	pillow,	and	wept.	I	took	her	hand.	She

squeezed	it	and	rolled	back	to	face	me.	Tears	were	dripping	from	her	nose.	“I	am

lonely.”

I	ordered	Whisky	out	of	the	bedroom.	We	made	love	and	fell	asleep	with	our

hands	together	in	the	I-love-you	sign.





Rich	Couple’s	House

Stanley	and	Gertrude	visited	us,	and	we	showed	them	our	property.	The	men	did

the	chores	while	the	women	cooked.	While	we	ate,	Stanley	said,	“I	would	have

shot	Frank.”

“I’ve	dreamed	of	shooting	him,”	signed	Pearl.

I	sighed.	“I	don’t	want	to	go	to	jail.	Maybe	I	should	walk	up	to	him	sometime

and	say,	‘I’ve	decided	not	to	shoot	you.’”

Stanley	 asked	 to	 see	 my	 pistol,	 so	 I	 unloaded	 it	 and	 brought	 it	 from	 the bedroom.	He	examined	it	and	passed	it	to	Gertrude.

“I’ve	never	fired	it.”

“Basements	are	for	sports,	aren’t	they?”	said	Stanley.

After	 dinner,	 our	 basement	 became	 a	 shooting	 gallery.	 We	 put	 on	 coats	 and filed	down	the	stairs,	Whisky	at	our	heels.	Pearl	carried	a	notepad	and	my	rifle.	I carried	 the	 pistol	 and	 the	 ammunition.	 Stanley	 carried	 a	 six-pack	 of	 beer	 and	 a bar	of	soap.	Gertrude	carried	wine	and	glasses.	We	filed	past	the	woodstove	and

through	 the	 door	 in	 the	 temporary	 partition	 into	 the	 unfinished	 side	 of	 the basement.	Two	light	bulbs	hanging	from	the	ceiling	failed	to	pierce	the	Stygian

gloom.	I	plugged	a	fluorescent	light	into	an	extension	cord.	The	air	was	so	cold

that	the	tube	flickered.

Stanley	 drew	 circles	 on	 a	 piece	 of	 plywood	 and	 leaned	 it	 against	 some firewood.	“Ten	points	for	a	bull’s	eye.	Minus	ten	for	hitting	the	BMW.”

“Everyone	 gets	 two	 pistol	 shots—a	 buck	 each,”	 I	 signed	 and	 said.	 The

shooter	wore	my	 chainsaw	earmuffs	while	 the	spectators	poked	 their	fingers	in

their	 ears.	 My	 turn	 was	 first;	 I	 aimed	 and	 fired.	 Whisky	 leaped	 behind	 Pearl.	 I took	a	second	shot	and	handed	the	gun	and	earmuffs	to	Pearl.

Pearl	hit	two	bull’s-eyes;	she	was	still	an	excellent	shot.	Pearl	handed	the	gun

and	earmuffs	to	Stanley.

Stanley	hit	the	target,	then	set	the	bar	of	soap	in	front	of	it	and	shot	it.	“See how	the	bullet	pierced	it?	Soap	cuts	like	flesh.”

Pearl	grimaced.

Stanley	 passed	 the	 pistol	 and	 earmuffs	 to	 Gertrude,	 who	 took	 two	 shots.

Then,	we	took	turns	shooting	the	economical	.22.	Dozens	of	brass	casings	soon

sparkled	 in	 the	 dirt.	 From	 time	 to	 time,	 we	 moved	 to	 the	 other	 side	 of	 the temporary	wall	to	warm	up.	During	one	of	our	thawing	breaks,	Stanley	lifted	an

old	magazine	from	the	tinder	pile	and	flipped	through	it.

“Why	don’t	you	get	this	for	Frank?”	Stanley	pointed	to	an	advertisement	for Get	Even:	The	Complete	Book	of	Dirty	Tricks.

Pearl	looked	at	it.	“Frank	needs	to	learn	that	what	he	did	is	not	fair.”

I	 remembered	 that	 the	 sign	 for	 “revenge”	 was	 one	 of	 the	 first	 signs	 Pearl taught	me.

Get	Even	arrived	a	few	weeks	later,	along	with	a	catalog	from	the	publisher, Paladin	Press.	The	book	was	200	pages	of	double-spaced	trivia—a	dirty	trick.

“Did	you	see	the	big	tree	at	the	top	of	the	field?	The	goats	ate	the	bark,	so	it’s dying.	We	should	have	put	wire	around	it.”

“I	will	cut	it	down	and	chainsaw	a	chair	into	the	stump	so	we	can	enjoy	the

view	from	there.”

I	 did	 so,	 and	 it	 became	 our	 favorite	 spot	 on	 the	 property.	 From	 our	 stump-chair,	 we	 could	 see	 the	 upper	 field	 and	 barn,	 the	 roof	 of	 the	 house,	 and,	 in	 the afternoon,	sunlight	reflecting	off	the	lake	and	glinting	through	the	trees.

I	cut	a	tree	for	our	first	Christmas	on	Bowen.	Perhaps	that	tree,	its	aroma,	and	its cheerful	lights	helped	us	reach	a	milestone:	although	we	had	been	engaged	for	a

year,	we	had	never	set	a	wedding	date.	I	thought	recommitment	might	help	Pearl

to	 release	 any	 residual	 insecurity,	 such	 as	 the	 paranoia	 that	 caused	 her	 to	 open my	mail.

In	 the	 glow	 of	 the	 Christmas	 tree,	 with	 glasses	 of	 wine,	 we	 sat	 down	 on kitchen	 chairs,	 the	 only	 chairs	 not	 covered	 in	 polyethylene	 sheets	 against	 the dust.

“We’ve	been	engaged	for	one	year.	Will	you	marry	me	on	your	birthday?”

Pearl	kissed	me.	“I	ask	you	again:	When	do	you	want	children?”

“As	 soon	 as	 this	 side	 of	 the	 house	 is	 finished.	 A	 year,	 maybe	 a	 few	 months longer	if	Frank	wins.”

“Why	not	marry	after	the	house	is	finished?”

“Why	 should	 our	 wedding	 depend	 on	 house	 construction?	 Also,	 that	 would

be	more	expensive.	If	a	couple	marries	at	the	end	of	the	year,	one	taxpayer	can

deduct	 the	 other	 for	 the	 whole	 year	 and	 get	 a	 $4,000	 tax	 refund.	 That’s	 two months’	salary.	But	the	tax	rules	change	next	year.”

“Our	 wedding	 day,	 my	 birthday,	 and	 Christmas	 Eve,	 all	 on	 the	 same	 day!	 I prefer	not	to	invite	Mother.”

“For	second	weddings,	couples	can	do	what	they	want.	Let’s	keep	it	simple.	I

will	 find	 a	 Justice	 of	 the	 Peace	 to	 marry	 us	 here.	 The	 minimum	 is	 two witnesses.”

“Stanley	and	Gertrude,	Rokus	and	Jenny,	or	Alan	and	Rose?”



“Stanley	and	Gertrude.”

“Under	the	Love	Trees.	Perfect!”	Pearl	signed	the	name	sign	she	invented	the

night	we	became	engaged.	“Pearl	King	…	I	love	it.”

After	calling	several	Justices	of	the	Peace	listed	in	the	Yellow	Pages,	I	found

one	 who	 would	 work	 on	 Christmas	 Eve.	 We	 had	 wedding	 portraits	 taken	 and drove	to	her	home	to	plan	the	ceremony.

She	was	startled	to	learn	the	bride	was	deaf.

“I	have	experience	with	the	deaf.	You	don’t	need	an	interpreter,	do	you,	dear?

I	know	you	can	read	lips.”

“What?”	signed	Pearl,	even	though	she	had	understood.

The	 Justice	 of	 the	 Peace	 leaned	 closer.	 “You	 do	 understand	 me, don’t	 you, dear?”	she	said	rudely,	a	foot	from	Pearl’s	face,	breathing	into	it.

I	was	disgusted.	Pearl	pulled	back.	“What	did	she	say?”	she	signed.

“Honey,	either	you	read	my	lips,	or	you	pay	for	a	certified	interpreter—if	you

can	find	one	at	Christmas.”

Pearl	agreed	to	lipread.

Mid-morning	on	Christmas	Eve,	the	Justice	of	the	Peace,	Stanley,	Gertrude,

Pearl,	 and	 I	 stood	 under	 the	 Love	 Trees	 as	 the	 sun	 sparkled	 on	 the	 frost.	 Pearl and	Gertrude	wore	their	best	dresses;	Stanley	and	I	wore	our	best	suits.	It	could not	 have	 been	 a	 more	 beautiful	 day	 to	 be	 married	 except	 that	 the	 temperature was	just	above	freezing.	We	were	married	as	quickly	as	possible	and	rushed	into

the	house	to	thaw.

After	toasts,	we	left	for	our	two-day	honeymoon.	Alan	and	Rose	cared	for	the

animals	 while	 Pearl,	 Whisky,	 and	 I	 spent	 Christmas	 Eve	 in	 the	 Vancouver Bayshore	Inn	and	Christmas	Day	with	my	parents.

Another	horse	arrived.	Wendy	rode	Senator,	a	chestnut	quarter	horse	gelding,	up

to	the	barn.	I	engraved	 Mouse	and	 Senator	signs	from	cedar	and	hung	them	over their	stalls.	Mouse	already	knew	his	place,	and	soon	Senator	knew	his.

Alan	called.	“Could	you	two	please	help	us	to	herd	the	sheep	to	the	barn	for

lambing?	On	foot—our	Volvo	is	only	now	free	of	sheep	urine	odor.	We	can	walk

them	up	the	gravel	side	of	your	driveway.	We’ll	open	the	wire	gate	and	let	them

into	the	upper	field	via	that	back	route.”

Alan	and	Rose	parked	across	the	driveway,	blocking	it.	I	parked	the	truck	at

the	top	of	the	circular	driveway	to	keep	the	sheep	from	walking	back	down	the

paved	 side.	 We	 opened	 the	 gate	 and	 walked	 into	 the	 lower	 field.	 The	 sheep huddled	 and	 moved	 away,	 bleating.	 Rose	 offered	 grain	 from	 a	 pail	 and	 tried	 to lead	them,	but	they	wouldn’t	follow,	so	we	all	moved	behind	the	flock.	Pearl	and

I	stayed	behind	them	while	Alan	and	Rose	herded	each	side,	beating	the	ground

with	sticks.	It	took	half	an	hour,	but	our	shepherding	worked.

As	I	walked	onto	the	ferry	on	my	way	home	from	work,	I	was	surprised	to	see

Stanley’s	GMC	Suburban.	I	waved,	climbed	in,	and	sat	on	the	blanket	covering

the	holes	in	the	seat.	It	reeked	of	mildew.

“What	happened	to	your	Mazda?”

“I	got	fired.	I	lost	my	salary	and	perks.	My	boss	was	monitoring	my	calls.	He

heard	me	say,	‘Mrs.	Rottweiler,	you	haven’t	made	your	card	payments	for	seven

months.	I	understand	your	husband	was	laid	off	a	year	ago,	and	you	have	to	stay

home	 with	 the	 children.	 That	 means	 you	 knew	 when	 you	 used	 our	 credit	 card that	neither	of	you	had	a	job,	so	why	did	you	use	our	card,	Mrs.	Rottweiler?	Can

you	work	while	your	husband	cares	for	the	children?	Have	you	thought	of	eating

and	drinking	less	so	you	can	set	aside	money	to	pay	your	bills?	Could	you	pay, say,	ten	dollars	a	month?’	She	told	me	that	she’d	had	many	collection	agents	call her,	 and	 she	 liked	 to	 talk	 to	 them—except	 me.	 What	 was	 I	 supposed	 to	 say?

‘That’s	fine.	Pay	whenever	you	like?’	I’m	now	as	unemployed	as	Mr.	Rottweiler.

Fortunately,	our	house	is	coming	along.	We’ve	moved	out	of	the	trailer!	Please

be	our	first	dinner	guests.”

A	few	days	later,	Pearl	and	I	parked	at	the	bottom	of	Stanley’s	hill	and	hiked

up	 the	 access	 road.	 I	 carried	 a	 bottle	 of	 Liebfraumilch	 while	 she	 held	 the flashlight.	 The	 freezing	 dew	 made	 the	 asphalt	 slick,	 so	 we	 walked	 without signing,	our	gloved	hands	poised	to	break	a	fall.	It	was	easier	to	walk	farther	up the	hill,	on	the	gravel.	We	walked	past	the	dark	trailer.	Near	the	top,	light	glowed from	two	windows	in	the	corner	of	the	house.

Gertrude	and	Stanley	greeted	us.	Behind	their	front	door,	it	was	like	a	frozen

dungeon.	 Sheets	 of	 plastic	 stapled	 to	 rows	 of	 studs	 defined	 the	 rooms.	 We walked	between	two	loose	sheets	and	into	tepid	warmth.

“We’re	only	heating	the	kitchen	and	half	the	living	room	because	our	stove	is

too	small,”	said	Stanley.	“We	don’t	have	a	fridge,	so	it’s	handy	when	half	your

house	is	a	walk-in	freezer.”

“Where	do	you	sleep?”	signed	Pearl.

“On	cots.	We	put	them	near	the	stove	at	night.”

We	 took	 off	 our	 coats	 and	 slid	 onto	 benches	 on	 either	 side	 of	 the	 kitchen table.	 All	 of	 us	 wore	 quilted	 lumberjack	 shirts.	 Our	 bedroom	 was	 a	 resort compared	to	these	Boy	Scout	conditions.

Stanley	opened	the	wine,	and	I	proposed	a	toast.

Pearl	squeezed	close	to	me.	“I’m	freezing.”

I	 put	 my	 hand	 on	 the	 window.	 “The	 glass	 is	 freezing!	 Where	 did	 you	 buy single-glazed	windows?”

“I	 made	 them!”	 Stanley	 said	 proudly.	 “They’re	 cheaper	 than	 commercial

windows.”

“Stanley,	your	heat	is	flying	out	the	window!	You’ll	spend	all	summer	cutting

firewood.	 And	 single-glazed	 windows	 aren’t	 up	 to	 code,	 so	 you	 can’t	 get	 a Certificate	of	Occupancy,	and	you	can’t	connect	electricity.”

After	 eating	 beef-and-potato	 stew,	 Pearl	 helped	 Gertrude	 wash	 the	 dishes.

Stanley	walked	through	the	plastic	sheets,	and	I	followed	him.	We	stood	at	the

top	of	the	stairs,	under	the	stars,	and	urinated	onto	the	ground.

“Derrick,	to	understand	what	you	see,	you	need	to	know	I’m	bankrupt.	When

the	 garnishee	 order	 arrived,	 Eaton’s	 sacked	 me;	 Mrs.	 Rottweiler	 was	 their excuse.	 Now	 I,	 a	 debt	 collector,	 have	 no	 means	 to	 settle	 my	 debts,	 let	 alone finish	our	house.”

Pearl	saw	that	although	Frank	had	done	a	bad	job	and	delayed	us	by	a	year,	it was	possible	to	do	worse	and	for	a	wife	to	suffer	more	hardship	with	no	end	in

sight.	 Frank	 had	 spoiled	 our	 house	 to	 make	 more	 money,	 while	 Stanley	 had spoiled	 his	 house	 because	 he	 had	 no	 money.	 Our	 best	 man	 and	 maid	 of	 honor were	building	an	illegal,	oversized	shack.

We	 awoke	 to	 a	 white-and-green	 winter	 wonderland;	 a	 foot	 of	 snow	 had	 fallen during	the	night.	The	view	in	every	direction,	from	every	window,	was	majestic.

Pearl	 looked	 at	 our	 frozen	 clothes	 on	 the	 clothesline	 and	 laughed;	 they	 looked like	ghosts.

I	walked	to	the	barn	to	do	the	chores,	savoring	the	morning	air	as	the	snow

crystals	 sparkled.	 But	 the	 drinking	 water	 had	 frozen,	 splitting	 the	 pails,	 so	 the horses	 were	 thirsty.	 No	 water	 came	 from	 the	 barn	 tap,	 now	 frozen.	 I	 fed	 the animals	and	walked	back	to	the	house.

“The	 barn	 has	 no	 water.	 The	 barn	 pipes	 need	 electric	 heat,	 a	 new	 project.

Now,	 we	 have	 to	 carry	 water	 until	 the	 ice	 thaws—two	 pails,	 fifteen	 kilograms each,	twice	a	day.	It’s	good	we	have	hay	and	grain	in	the	barn	and	firewood	in

the	basement	because	the	truck	can’t	drive	up	the	road	now.”

“My	uncle	used	to	put	‘mol—’	in	the	water	to	keep	it	from	freezing.”

“Molasses.	I	read	about	that.	Let’s	try	it.”

Molasses	didn’t	work;	the	water	still	froze	quickly.	Each	day,	we	watched	the

barn	 thermometer	 go	 lower,	 down	 to	 -15	 Celsius.	 For	 weeks,	 we	 carried	 our groceries	up	the	driveway	in	backpacks.	We	walked	flashlight-in-hand,	or	when

our	hands	were	full,	flashlight-in-teeth,	for	winter	commuting	was	always	dark.

Sometimes,	 we	 slipped	 and	 slid	 down	 the	 driveway	 and	 slogged	 up	 again	 with snow	in	our	boots.

Whisky	loved	the	snow.	When	we	threw	sticks,	he	would	chase	the	stick	as

fast	as	he	could,	then	spin	and	slide	while	struggling	to	stop.	We	felt	grateful	to live	so	close	to	nature.

A	week	later,	the	pipes	in	the	house	froze.

“Ross	 was	 right!	 The	 pipes	 froze	 because	 Frank	 put	 them	 in	 the	 attic.	 We must	warm	them,	or	they	will	burst	and	water	will	ruin	the	house.	And	no	water

means	no	fire	insurance.”

Pearl	was	livid.	“Frank	is	preventing	me	from	living	like	a	woman!”

All	we	could	do	was	heat	the	house	to	tropical	temperatures,	so	hot	that	we

could	walk	through	it	nude	in	the	middle	of	winter,	and	our	lips	cracked	from	the desiccated	 air.	 After	 days	 of	 burning	 firewood	 at	 a	 stupendous	 rate,	 water returned	to	our	taps.

The	 Undercurrent	reported	it	was	the	coldest	winter	in	a	decade.

“Hello,”	 I	 said	 to	 two	 newborn	 lambs.	 An	 ewe	 looked	 up	 from	 the	 straw,	 her fleece	thick	with	lanolin,	the	greasy	smell	hanging	in	the	air.	I	ran	to	the	house, told	Pearl,	and	called	Alan.

The	 driveway	 was	 impassible,	 so	 Alan	 and	 Rose	 parked	 by	 the	 road	 and

trekked	 up	 the	 hill.	 Rose	 cleared	 the	 ewe’s	 teats	 by	 milking	 with	 two	 fingers while	 Alan	 disinfected	 the	 lambs’	 navels	 with	 iodine.	 He	 took	 a	 tool	 from	 his pocket,	put	a	rubber	ring	on	it,	and	squeezed	the	handle	to	stretch	it	open.	“This is	an	Elastrator,	for	docking	and	castration.	It	is	painless.”	He	pulled	each	lamb’s tail	through	the	tool	and	pressed	a	lever,	so	the	rubber	ring	snapped	tight.	“The tail	will	fall	off	in	two	weeks.	I’ll	leave	this	with	you	to	castrate	your	kids.”

Unlike	sheep,	which	lamb	at	night,	Mothergoat	kidded	on	a	spring	afternoon,

bellowing.	She	delivered	one	kid,	a	buck.	Daughtergoat	soon	gave	birth	to	two

more	bucks.

The	 barn	 and	 its	 paddock	 were	 like	 a	 petting	 zoo,	 with	 eight	 lambs,	 four ewes,	three	goats,	three	kids,	two	horses,	two	cats,	a	kitten,	and	a	dog.	We	were	a family,	and	we	loved	it,	not	least	because	it	took	our	minds	off	the	house.	Alan

or	Rose,	often	with	their	children,	visited	the	lambs	frequently	even	though	we

had	taken	over	all	their	daily	feedings	in	return	for	vacation	relief.	It	was	an	ideal arrangement.

Virgil	drove	to	Bowen	Island	for	what	would	be	his	only	visit.	At	Trout	Lake,	he

gazed	at	the	vista	and	drew	a	deep	breath.	“You	got	a	lake,	and	I	got	a	river.	You son	of	a	bitch,	man,	this	is	great!	Did	you	see	that	trout	breach?”

We	 collected	 handfuls	 of	 fiddleheads,	 the	 greens	 of	 spring,	 from	 around	 the lake	 and	 walked	 back	 up	 the	 hill.	 Pearl	 threw	 a	 stick	 from	 the	 woodpile	 over Whisky’s	head.	He	caught	it	and	dropped	it	at	her	feet.

“This	is	a	rich	couple’s	house,”	said	Virgil.	“The	windows	face	the	sun,	and

the	skylights	face	the	stars.	Perfect	peace.”

Pearl	pointed	to	the	unfinished	west	wing.	“But	wait	until	you	see	inside.	We

have	peace,	but	I	get	lonely.”

“But	you	work,	don’t	you?”	said	Virgil.

“Yes,	but	I	have	few	friends	at	the	post	office.	They	only	gossip.”

“When	people	don’t	have	much	to	talk	about,	they	gossip,”	I	signed	and	said.

“Not	only	deaf.”

Virgil	took	his	vial	from	his	pocket	and	passed	it	around.	“A	guy	on	a	BMW

was	 on	 the	 ferry,	 a	 bike	 like	 yours	 but	 with	 a	 green	 tank.	 Get	 to	 know	 him, Derrick—he’s	your	neighborhood	dealer.”

“How	do	you	know?”

“His	bike!	The	bugs	were	like	a	yellow-and-black	paint	job.	I	asked	if	he	was

coming	back	from	Mexico.	He	said	from	California—but	his	bike	was	too	dirty for	 that,	 the	 way	 a	 bike	 gets	 when	 you	 are	 too	 busy	 to	 stop.	 I	 know	 he	 was lying.”

“Great	analysis.	Would	you	like	a	tour?”

We	sat	three	abreast	in	Virgil’s	F250	pickup.	He	popped	a	cassette	of	Cuban

music	into	the	stereo,	and	I	gave	directions.	After	touring	the	island,	we	returned to	the	house.

“Help	us	with	chores.	We	need	to	castrate	and	disbud	the	kids.	You	can	help

by	holding	them.”

Virgil	took	a	joint	from	his	pocket	and	lit	it.	“I	like	to	smoke	a	joint	before	I castrate.”	We	passed	the	joint	around.

I	lit	a	propane	torch	and	propped	a	piece	of	copper	pipe	over	the	flame.	While

the	 pipe	 warmed,	 Pearl	 and	 Virgil	 cradled	 each	 kid	 while	 I	 pulled	 its	 scrotum through	 the	 open	 rubber	 ring	 of	 the	 Elastrator	 and	 pushed	 the	 lever	 to	 close	 it.

The	kids	felt	nothing,	but	after	a	few	minutes,	they	hopped	silently	in	circles,	in some	discomfort	but	not	in	pain.

While	 Pearl	 and	 Virgil	 held	 a	 kid,	 I	 pressed	 the	 red-hot	 pipe	 onto	 one	 of	 its horn	buds.	Smoke	curled	up	as	the	kid	cried	out,	the	bud	charred,	and	the	stench

of	burned	hair	filled	the	barn.

“I’ll	go	and	cook	dinner,”	signed	Pearl,	leaving	the	barn.

Virgil	and	I	cauterized	the	other	bud.	The	kid	ran	to	its	mother	and	suckled,

now	silent.	We	disbudded	the	other	kids.

In	the	house,	I	opened	some	beer,	and	Pearl	served	pasta	with	goat	cheese.

“You	 steamed	 the	 fiddleheads	 perfectly,	 just	 like	 asparagus,”	 said	 Virgil.

“Pearl,	how	do	you	like	living	in	an	unfinished	house	while	your	animals	live	in

a	finished	barn?”

“I	 like	 it	 here.	 Many	 oral	 deafies	 prefer	 city	 life,	 but	 many	 signing	 deafies prefer	a	country	life	because	city	life	has	too	many	problems.”

“Like	what?”

“I	went	into	an	elevator.	It	moved	and	stopped	but	didn’t	open.	I	pounded	on

the	 door.	 Then	 someone	 tapped	 my	 shoulder!	 That	 elevator	 had	 doors	 at	 the back,	too,	but	I	didn’t	hear	the	door	open	behind	me.	Sometimes,	stores	give	you

a	number	and	call	that	number	over	the	speaker.	The	deafie-hearie	difference	is

smaller	in	the	country.”

We	 enjoyed	 an	 evening	 of	 conversation,	 marijuana,	 cocaine,	 and	 laughter.

Virgil	left	on	the	last	ferry.

The	days	grew	longer.	As	the	kids	were	weaned,	our	milk	and	cheese	production

peaked.	Pearl	sold	goat	cheese	to	her	colleagues.	I	sold	it	to	a	delicatessen.	It	was

illegal	to	sell	it,	but	we	didn’t	care.

We	spread	pasture	seed	with	a	Cyclone	spreader.	I	installed	electric	heat	tapes

and	 automatic	 watering	 bowls	 for	 the	 barn,	 ending	 the	 need	 to	 carry	 water	 in winter.

The	farrier	came	to	shoe	Mouse	and	Senator.	Pearl	and	I	watched	him	remove

the	worn	horseshoes	and	heat	new	ones	on	a	forge.	When	the	new	shoes	glowed

red	hot,	he	pounded	them	to	size	on	his	anvil,	reheated	them,	and	nailed	them	to

the	hooves.	I	complimented	the	farrier	on	his	medieval	performance.

“I	 wouldn’t	 do	 anything	 else,”	 said	 the	 farrier.	 “Coming	 here	 doesn’t	 pay, though.”

“Where	do	you	earn	money?”

“At	 the	 racetrack.	 The	 owner	 of	 a	 $100,000	 horse	 doesn’t	 care	 what

horseshoes	cost.”	He	handed	the	old	horseshoes	to	Pearl.	“For	good	luck.	Hang

them	pointing	up	because	if	they	turn	down,	your	luck	will	spill	out.”

“Tom	and	his	family	are	coming,”	I	signed	as	I	hung	up	the	telephone.	“They’ll

stay	a	week	while	they	visit	Expo	‘86.”

“You	didn’t	tell	me	about	Tom.”

“He	 is	 a	 BMW-riding	 friend	 from	 Saskatchewan.	 They	 are	 coming	 on	 two

motorcycles:	 Tom,	 with	 his	 fifteen-year-old	 son,	 and	 his	 wife,	 with	 their fourteen-year-old	 daughter.	 They	 can	 take	 the	 water	 taxi	 to	 Expo.	 That	 will	 be fun	for	them.”

“You	take	them	to	Expo.	I	will	go	with	Jodi	so	you	won’t	have	to	interpret.”	I

was	disappointed	Pearl	didn’t	want	to	join	us.

Our	visitors	visited	Expo	nearly	every	day,	once	with	me	and	the	rest	on	their

own.	 They	 loved	 Bowen	 Island.	 The	 children	 were	 fascinated	 by	 signing,

especially	 by	 how	 Whisky	 obeyed	 sign	 language	 commands.	 They	 enjoyed

writing	to	Pearl,	and	they	loved	the	barn.

Tom	said,	“What	could	be	finer	than	living	in	a	forest	by	a	lake,	working	in

an	 office,	 and	 commuting	 on	 the	 sea?	 I	 walked	 to	 the	 lake,	 and	 I	 saw	 a	 naked woman	dive	into	the	water!	What	a	place	you	have.	Don’t	ever	give	it	up.”

“It	 is	 our	 dream	 home,	 except	 for	 the	 construction	 problems,”	 signed	 Pearl.

“It	is	safe	and	peaceful.”

“Peaceful?	Surely,	noise	never	bothers	a	deaf	person.”

“That’s	 true,	 but	 I	 will	 tell	 you	 a	 story.	 A	 deafie	 was	 cleaning	 her	 house.

When	 she	 got	 to	 the	 attic,	 she	 cleaned	 an	 old	 lamp.	 A	 spirit	 popped	 out	 and signed,	‘You	have	three	wishes.	What	do	you	want?’	The	deafie	signed,	‘Clean

the	 house.’	 The	 spirit	 blinked,	 and	 the	 house	 was	 clean.	 ‘You	 have	 two	 wishes left.’	 ‘Give	 me	 hearing,’	 signed	 the	 deafie.	 The	 spirit	 blinked,	 and	 the	 woman

could	hear.	‘You	have	one	wish	left.’	‘Wait,’	she	said,	amazed	to	hear	her	voice.

She	shouted,	‘I	can	hear!’	She	heard	her	kids	fighting	and	yelling.	She	called	to them,	but	they	ignored	her.	She	heard	the	TV	blasting	and	her	hearie	husband’s

friends	shouting	and	swearing	as	they	watched	football.	She	walked	to	the	store

and	 heard	 traffic,	 music	 from	 the	 ceiling,	 people,	 machines,	 everything!	 She went	home	and	saw	the	house	was	a	mess	again.	‘I	wish	for	a	peaceful	house,’

she	said.	The	spirit	reappeared,	and	she	was	deaf	again.	‘Thank	you,’	she	signed.

Sometimes	it	is	better	to	be	deaf.”

Tom	smiled.	“By	the	way,	did	you	know	your	kids	are	ready	to	eat?	They	can

grow	larger,	but	the	feed	will	cost	more	than	the	meat	is	worth.”

“Shall	we	slaughter	them	together?”

“I’d	love	to!	My	friend	and	I	do	a	hog	every	year.	We	collect	scraps	from	the

Co-op	and	feed	our	hog	for	nothing.”

The	 next	 day,	 while	 Pearl	 and	 Jodi	 went	 to	 Expo	 and	 Tom’s	 family	 went swimming	in	Bowen	Bay,	Tom	and	I	slaughtered	the	kids.	He	taught	me	what	to

do.	He	skinned	the	first	kid	as	if	he	were	undressing	it,	removing	the	whole	skin in	one	piece.	I	killed	and	slaughtered	the	second	kid	while	Tom	coached	me.	We

hung	the	carcasses	next	to	my	BMW.

The	next	day,	while	Tom	and	his	family	began	their	long	ride	home,	Pearl	and

I	butchered	and	wrapped	the	meat.





Shooting	Pigs	in	a	Sty

We	 were	 astonished	 to	 see	 a	 mobile	 home	 appear	 next	 to	 Trout	 Lake,	 barely visible	from	our	property	through	the	trees.

The	 next	 day,	 when	 I	 returned	 from	 work,	 I	 saw	 a	 pink	 extension	 cord crossing	our	driveway.

Pearl	was	anxious.

“Whisky	 ran	 to	 the	 bedroom	 window,	 barking.	 A	 man	 was	 walking	 through

the	forest,	unrolling	wire.	When	he	reached	our	door,	he	knocked.	I	put	the	gun

in	my	pocket.	I	held	Whisky	back	and	opened	the	door.	It	was	Wayne!”

Pearl	handed	me	her	notepad.	It	said:

“We	need	power	for	a	few	months.	We	will	pay. ”

“I	must	ask	my	husband.”

“Fran	is	developing	her	property	around	the	lake. ”

“Derrick	will	talk	to	you. ”

“We	need	power	tonight. ”

“Wayne	pointed	to	the	power	outlet	by	our	front	door.	Then	he	left.	Say	no!	If

we	start,	it	will	be	impossible	to	stop.”

I	 changed	 my	 clothes.	 Pearl	 gave	 me	 the	 gun,	 and	 I	 put	 it	 in	 my	 pocket.	 I dragged	the	wire	back	to	the	mobile	home.	Bear	barked	inside	it,	but	no	one	was

home.

A	 few	 days	 later,	 we	 found	 surveyor’s	 tapes	 nailed	 to	 our	 fence,	 so	 I	 called Laurent.

“Fran	 and	 Wayne	 are	 living	 in	 a	 trailer	 by	 the	 lake.	 A	 few	 days	 ago,	 they asked	 to	 borrow	 power	 through	 a	 hundred-meter	 extension	 cord.	 Now,

surveyor’s	tapes	have	appeared	along	our	property	line.	What’s	up?”

“I	 can’t	 tell	 you	 that.	 But,	 because	 the	 bids	 were	 published	 in	 the

Undercurrent,	I	can	tell	you	that	Fran	won	the	Bowen	Island	garbage	collection contract.	 Her	 bid	 was	 by	 far	 the	 lowest.	 Did	 you	 hear	 a	 bulldozer	 across	 the road?”

“Yes.	I	was	wondering	what	a	bulldozer	was	doing	over	there.”

“You	know	garbage	must	be	trucked	off	the	island,	by	law.	You	might	guess

that	Fran	has	been	burying	garbage	on	her	property	with	her	bulldozer,	just	200

meters	from	the	reservoir	and	in	breach	of	environmental	laws.”

“Might	I	guess	that	our	former	neighbors	are	squatters?”

“Tell	 Pearl	 to	 relax;	 they	 won’t	 be	 there	 much	 longer.	 The	 survey	 tapes

around	the	lake	are	a	red	herring.”

Pearl	and	I	set	up	a	sty	with	automatic	water	and	an	electric	fence,	and	we	drove to	 the	 Fraser	 Valley	 Livestock	 Auction.	 Even	 though	 Pearl	 couldn’t	 hear	 the auction,	it	was	entertainment	for	both	of	us.	The	only	piglets	at	auction	that	day were	unneutered	males,	so	we	bid	on	two	even	though	we	would	have	to	castrate

them.	They	were	cute,	and	we	could	carry	them	like	puppies.

Before	 releasing	 them	 into	 our	 sty,	 we	 touched	 them	 to	 the	 electric	 wire	 to train	 them	 to	 avoid	 it,	 and	 we	 held	 their	 snouts	 to	 the	 watering	 nipple	 to	 show them	where	to	 drink.	The	piglets	 trotted	into	their	 shelter,	our	 decommissioned outhouse	lying	on	its	side,	and	lay	down	to	rest.

The	 power	 failed	 a	 few	 minutes	 later.	 Pearl	 and	 I	 ran	 to	 the	 sty.	 The	 piglets had	walked	out	through	the	disabled	fence.

We	 searched	 for	 half	 an	 hour.	 We	 didn’t	 know	 what	 to	 do	 except	 to	 report their	loss	to	the	police;	if	they	weren’t	captured,	there	would	soon	be	two	feral boars	on	Bowen	Island.

“Are	 they	 pink?	 Do	 they	 have	 four	 legs?”	 Laurent	 howled	 with	 laughter.

“Thanks	for	calling.	I’ll	call	you	back	if	anyone	reports	them.”

The	power	had	come	back	on.	Pearl	and	I	went	out	to	search	again	and,	to	our

astonishment,	found	the	piglets	with	Mouse	and	Senator	in	the	paddock,	rolling

in	 horse	 manure.	 We	 were	 thrilled	 when	 they	 allowed	 us	 to	 pick	 them	 up	 and carry	them	back	to	their	sty.	We	were	not	thrilled	that	our	clothes	were	covered

in	mud	and	manure.

I	called	Larsen	back,	and	he	laughed.	“You	made	my	day.	I	love	Bowen!	I’ll

rue	the	day	I’m	ever	transferred	to	Toronto.”

The	 pigs	 never	 approached	 the	 fence	 again,	 even	 when	 the	 power	 failed.	 In addition	to	Buckerfield’s	feed,	we	fed	them	the	whey	from	our	cheese-making.

When	we	poured	it	into	their	trough,	they	sucked	it	down	in	seconds,	competing

with	each	other	in	pure	primal	greed.

We	 studied	 the	 castration	 procedure	 in	 Small-Scale	 Pig	 Raising.	 The	 Elastrator couldn’t	be	used;	we	had	to	do	surgery.	It	had	to	be	done;	otherwise,	the	boars

could	become	aggressive,	and	their	meat	would	taste	gamey.

Pearl	sat	on	the	milking	stand,	braced	her	back	against	the	wall,	held	a	piglet

on	its	back	with	its	head	in	her	crotch	and	a	hind	leg	in	each	hand,	and	nodded.

Our	hands	were	full,	so	we	couldn’t	sign.

As	soon	as	I	dripped	iodine	on	its	scrotum,	the	piglet	started	kicking.	Pearl’s

arms	 were	 no	 match	 for	 the	 strength	 of	 its	 legs,	 and	 there	 was	 no	 way	 I	 could operate	on	a	moving	target,	so	we	swapped	roles.

The	piglet	screamed	as	I	struggled	to	hold	it	still	for	Pearl.	She	cut	with	an	X-Acto	 knife	 to	 expose	 a	 testicle.	 The	 pig	 shrieked	 so	 loudly	 that	 Pearl	 heard	 it, too.	 She	 pulled	 out	 the	 testicle	 and	 held	 up	 her	 hands	 to	 show	 me	 they	 were trembling.	 She	 excised	 the	 second	 testicle	 and	 sprinkled	 blood	 stopper	 powder on	the	wound.	The	piglet	stopped	screaming.	I	put	it	down,	and	it	trotted	about

the	barn	as	if	nothing	had	happened.

Pearl	was	crying	when	I	brought	her	the	second	piglet.

Rokus	knocked	on	the	barn	door	while	Pearl	and	I	were	doing	Sunday	morning

chores.	 “Could	 you	 give	 us	 a	 hand	 next	 weekend?	 We	 bought	 piglets	 three months	ago,	so	now	we	have	200	kilos	of	pig.	Bring	your	gun.	Bowen	Island’s

closed	 to	 the	 discharge	 of	 firearms	 nowadays,	 but	 two	 shots	 an	 hour	 apart shouldn’t	be	a	problem.”

When	we	arrived,	a	fire	was	crackling	underneath	a	drum	of	steaming	water.

“The	 first	 pig	 should	 be	 an	 easy	 shot,”	 said	 Rokus,	 “but	 the	 second	 will	 be terrified.”

Rokus	 dropped	 a	 handful	 of	 grain	 on	 the	 ground	 next	 to	 the	 fence,	 and	 the pigs	ran	over	to	eat	it.	I	fired	straight	down	into	the	center	of	the	closest	skull.

Behind	 a	 cloud	 of	 blue	 smoke,	 the	 pig	 screamed	 and	 staggered,	 blood	 pouring from	its	jaw.	Rokus	was	furious	that	the	pig	was	suffering,	so	I	gave	him	the	gun.

He	 jumped	 over	 the	 fence	 and	 shot	 it	 again.	 It	 collapsed	 and	 began	 its	 death throes.

Rokus’s	neighbor	walked	over.	“Two	shots	for	one	pig?”

“Give	us	a	hand,”	said	Rokus.

He,	his	neighbor,	and	I	dragged	the	carcass	to	the	drum.	Rokus	stabbed	both

hind	 trotters	 and	 pushed	 a	 pipe	 through	 them.	 Jenny	 and	 the	 neighbor	 steadied the	drum	while	Rokus	and	I	each	gripped	an	end	of	the	pipe	and	hoisted	it.	We

lifted	our	arms	straight	up,	but	we	couldn’t	raise	the	carcass	high	enough	for	its head	to	clear	the	drum.	We	lowered	the	carcass	to	the	ground.	Rokus	asked	his

neighbor	to	bring	his	backhoe.

His	 neighbor	 returned	 in	 his	 vintage	 backhoe.	 The	 machine	 hoisted	 the

carcass	 into	 the	 air	 and	 down	 into	 the	 drum.	 After	 a	 few	 minutes,	 the	 backhoe lifted	the	carcass	onto	a	bench.	Rokus	scraped	it	with	the	back	of	a	knife.

“The	water’s	not	hot	enough	to	loosen	the	hair!”

The	 backhoe	 hoisted	 the	 carcass	 into	 the	 air,	 and	 the	 neighbor	 shut	 off	 its engine.	 While	 the	 carcass	 hung,	 Rokus	 used	 a	 propane	 torch	 to	 burn	 the	 hair away;	 then,	 he	 slit	 the	 neck	 to	 bleed	 it.	 He	 rolled	 a	 wheelbarrow	 under	 the carcass	 and	 gutted	 it,	 showing	 Pearl	 and	 me	 how	 to	 do	 it	 without	 soiling	 the meat.	He	dropped	the	entrails	into	the	wheelbarrow	and	tossed	the	spleen	to	his

dog.	He	turned	the	intestines	inside	out,	for	sausage	casings,	and	rinsed	them	and the	organ	meats.	He	sawed	off	the	head,	sawed	the	carcass	in	half,	and	rinsed	the sides,	explaining	everything	as	he	worked.	We	hung	the	sides	in	his	shed	to	cool

overnight.

Rokus	shot	the	second	pig.

After	 the	 scalding	 failure	 at	 Rokus’s,	 we	 prepared	 carefully	 for	 the	 work	 we would	 do	 three	 months	 later.	 We	 bought	 a	 freezer.	 I	 bought	 a	 cast-iron	 bathtub from	a	scrapyard,	a	better	scalding	bath	than	a	drum	because	the	carcass	could

be	lifted	horizontally.	It	was	so	heavy	it	took	four	men	to	lift	it	onto	our	truck.

Halfway	 up	 the	 driveway,	 the	 tub	 slid	 back	 and	 bent	 the	 tailgate,	 almost smashing	it	open.

Pearl	 was	 furious.	 “You	 didn’t	 tie	 it	 down!	 Are	 you	 an	 idiot?	 Look	 at	 our truck	now!	Bent!”

We	ate	dinner	without	signing,	and	Pearl	watched	TV	alone.

At	bedtime,	she	climbed	into	bed	on	her	edge	of	the	mattress.	I	turned	off	the

light	and	put	my	arm	around	her	shoulder.	She	rolled	over	and	punched	me	in	the

chest.	I	jumped	out	of	bed	and	turned	on	the	light.

“Hit	 me!	 Hit	 me	 hard!	 Come	 on,	 I	 dare	 you!	 You	 don’t	 want	 to	 give	 me	 a bruise	I	can	show	to	the	police!”

I	stared	at	her.

She	relaxed	and	smiled	serenely.	“Are	you	going	to	hit	me	or	not?”

“No.”

She	lay	down	and	closed	her	eyes.	I	turned	off	the	light.	I	heard	her	breathing

settle	into	sleep,	and	only	then	could	I	sleep.	I	couldn’t	understand	why	she	had become	violent	and	had	then	forgiven	me.	I	sensed	that	her	overreaction	was	part

of	a	bigger	problem	I	didn’t	understand.

On	the	last	day	of	June,	I	stared	at	the	ATM	screen:

Transaction	declined.

Insufficient	funds.

It	was	right	after	payday,	yet	my	balance	was	zero.	I	rushed	inside	and	was	told

the	bank	had	received	a	court	order	to	transfer	all	the	money	in	our	account	to	a lawyer	representing	Frank	Schutt.	I	called	Clifford.

“Frank	 will	 do	 this	 again	 unless	 you	 add	 someone	 who	 isn’t	 a	 party	 to	 the suit,	such	as	your	mother,	to	your	joint	account.	Your	problem	is	that	there	are

more	 homeowners	 who	 don’t	 pay	 than	 there	 are	 contractors	 who	 don’t	 deliver, and	 courts	 like	 simple	 explanations.	 Arguing	 quality	 is	 useless.	 Pay	 him	 to	 get

rid	of	him.”

Pearl	was	furious	when	I	broke	the	news.	I	apologized	for	hiring	an	amateur,

trusting	 Frank,	 and	 not	 taking	 the	 contract	 to	 a	 lawyer.	 But	 neither	 of	 us	 could accept	that	Frank	deserved	full	payment,	so	we	paid	Clifford	a	$1,450	retainer	to defend	Frank’s	claim,	and	we	added	my	mother	to	our	joint	account.

We	continued	to	avoid	touching	Frank’s	work.	We	improved	the	drainage	in

the	upper	field.	I	installed	gutters	around	the	barn	so	the	paddock	would	be	less muddy.	 We	 had	 a	 pole	 erected	 for	 the	 barn’s	 electrical	 cable,	 lifting	 it	 off	 the ground.	 Our	 improvements	 added	 value	 to	 the	 property,	 but	 they	 brought	 Pearl no	closer	to	her	dream	of	having	a	family.

“Let’s	 whitewash	 the	 barn	 to	 make	 it	 bright,”	 signed	 Pearl.	 “My	 uncle	 said whitewash	is	cheaper	than	paint.”

We	bought	lime	and	salt,	mixed	a	batch,	and	whitewashed	one	stall.	It	looked

good.	We	admired	our	work	and	smiled.

“I	told	you	so,”	signed	Pearl.	“Let’s	mix	more,	and	paint	when	we	have	time.

Slowly,	we	will	cover	the	inside	of	the	barn.”

A	few	days	later,	my	secretary	shouted.	“Derrick,	telephone,	quick!”	I	heard	a

noisy	radiotelephone	connection.

“This	 is	 the	 Bowen	 Island	 Water	 Taxi.	 Your	 wife	 is	 on	 a	 stretcher.	 The ambulance	 crew	 is	 bringing	 her	 to	 Lions	 Gate	 Hospital.	 She’s	 blinded	 herself with	whitewash.”

I	was	horrified!	I	borrowed	my	boss’s	car	and	rushed	to	the	hospital.	Pearl	lay

on	a	gurney,	her	eyes	closed,	wearing	overalls	and	gumboots.	Her	clothes	were

soaked.

A	paramedic	held	a	bag	of	saline	solution	over	her	head	and	was	dripping	it

into	her	eyes.

“Is	she	is	deaf?”

“Yes.	How	is	she?”

“We	don’t	know	because	we	haven’t	been	able	to	open	her	eyes.”

Pearl’s	 hand,	 strong	 from	 milking	 goats,	 clamped	 mine	 like	 a	 vise.	 I	 kissed Pearl	on	her	salty	lips,	and	she	relaxed.	She	raised	her	other	hand	and	signed,	“I love	you.”

“The	doctor	will	see	her	now,”	said	the	nurse,	wheeling	her	away.	I	took	care

of	the	paperwork	while	Pearl	was	being	treated.

The	doctor	called	me	into	the	examination	room.	Pearl	lay	with	her	eyes	open

but	 with	 plastic	 tubes	 sticking	 out	 of	 them,	 so	 she	 couldn’t	 see	 anything.	 Each tube	ran	to	a	bag	of	saline	solution.

“We’ll	leave	the	irrigation	contacts	in	for	an	hour.	Please	tell	her.”

I	fingerspelled	on	Pearl’s	hand.

“It’s	 too	 soon	 to	 say	 if	 her	 corneas	 are	 damaged.	 No	 eye	 protection!	 If	 you lost	your	eyes,	it	would	be	tragic,	but	if	she	lost	hers,	it	would	be	a	catastrophe!”

I	 held	 Pearl’s	 hand	 for	 an	 hour.	 The	 doctor	 removed	 the	 contacts,	 examined her	cherry-red	eyes,	taped	patches	over	them,	gave	me	a	bottle	of	eye	drops,	and

told	 me	 to	 remove	 her	 patches	 in	 the	 morning.	 For	 one	 night,	 Pearl	 was	 deaf-blind.	I	helped	her	to	her	feet,	guided	her	to	a	toilet,	and	helped	her	to	use	it.	Our journey	 home	 took	 more	 than	 an	 hour,	 and	 all	 while	 she	 was	 soaking	 wet.	 I undressed	her,	washed	her,	fed	her,	and	put	her	to	bed.

I	 changed	 and	 walked	 to	 the	 barn	 in	 my	 overalls.	 The	 horses	 stood	 outside and	 pawed	 the	 ground,	 thirsty	 and	 hungry.	 The	 doors	 were	 closed.	 The	 area around	the	sink	was	wet.	A	pail	of	whitewash	stood	on	a	ladder,	and	a	brush	lay

on	 the	 floor.	 I	 looked	 up	 and	 saw	 that	 the	 ceiling	 around	 the	 light	 had	 been whitewashed.	 Pearl	 had	 been	 painting	 directly	 over	 her	 head	 without	 any	 eye protection!	I	cleaned	up	and	did	the	chores.

In	the	morning,	I	removed	her	eye	patches.	Her	eyes	and	eyelids	were	red	and

swollen.

“I	see	through	a	fog.	I	can’t	go	to	work	today.”

“You	were	lucky.	How	did	you	call	the	ambulance?”

“I	 stumbled	 to	 the	 house.	 My	 eyes	 were	 on	 fire.	 I	 had	 to	 feel	 the	 number-holes	on	the	telephone	dial.	I	dialed	911.	Then	I	talked.”	She	mumbled,	“Elp	…

‘o-oor	 …	 ‘ole	 643	 …	 I	 am	 ‘eaf	 …	 ‘elp	 …. ”	 “I	 hoped	 someone	 was	 listening.	 I didn’t	hang	up.	I	talked	and	talked.	Whisky	barked	when	they	came.	I	held	his

collar	and	walked	to	the	door	with	my	eyes	closed.”

The	incident	made	us	talk	about	future	emergencies.	What	if	she	had	another

accident?	What	if	the	house	caught	fire?	What	if	there	was	an	intruder?	I	bought

a	Radio	Shack	dialer	and	programmed	it	to	call	the	police,	fire	department,	and

ambulance	 by	 pushing	 one	 button.	 The	 cassette	 would	 play:	 “This	 is	 an emergency.	 Pearl	 King	 is	 calling	 from	 Trunk	 Road	 pole	 643.	 I	 am	 deaf.	 I	 need help. This	is	an	emergency. ”	We	kept	it	in	the	bedroom.

In	August,	we	ordered	hay	for	our	animals	and	to	resell	at	a	profit.	I	ordered	a

semi-trailer	 full,	 seven	 tons.	 A	 motor-escalator	 lifted	 the	 150	 bales	 into	 our hayloft.	We	built	bridle	racks	and	saddlehorses	in	the	tack	room	to	be	ready	for

four	horses,	and	a	hitching	post,	too.

To	 make	 the	 saddlehorses,	 Pearl	 helped	 feed	 planks	 into	 the	 saw	 while	 I guided	 them	 through	 the	 blade.	 I	 milled	 the	 edges	 with	 a	 router	 while	 Pearl swept	 the	 chips	 into	 paper	 bags	 to	 burn	 as	 fuel.	 She	 pointed	 at	 the	 Black	 & Decker	Workmate,	a	woodworking	vise.	“Where	did	you	get	that	tool?”

“Father	left	it	here	after	we	made	the	barn	doors.”

During	dinner,	Pearl	startled	me	by	signing,	“You	bought	that	tool.”

“It’s	my	father’s	tool.	I	am	borrowing	it.”

“You	are	spending	our	money	secretly!	Admit	it!”

I	was	astonished.	“Call	Father	through	the	MRC.	Ask	him.”

Pearl	 sneered.	 “You	 lie!	 Your	 father	 will	 repeat	 what	 you	 said	 because	 you told	him	to	tell	me	that.	You	lie! You	lie! ”

I	brought	the	well-worn	tool	into	the	kitchen.	“Look	closely.	Is	it	new?”

“You	made	it	look	like	that!”

“You	sound	like	Frank.	Why	are	you	arguing	about	a	stupid	tool?”

She	 glared	 at	 me.	 “Because	 you	 lie	 to	 me! Fuck	 you! ”	 She	 gave	 me	 her

“middle	finger”	the	deaf	way,	horizontally	instead	of	vertically.

I	 lost	 my	 self-control.	 I	 grabbed	 her	 shoulders	 and	 screamed,	 “It’s	 not	 my fucking	tool!”

Pearl	held	out	her	hands	to	show	me	they	trembled.	“I’m	shocked!”	She	put

her	hands	on	her	face.	“My	face	is	hot.	I	know	you	wanted	to	hurt	me.	Tonight	I

will	sleep	alone,”	she	signed	calmly.

At	bedtime,	Pearl	calmly	pulled	the	plastic	sheets	off	the	sofa	and	slept	in	the

living	room	for	the	first	time.	I	listened	to	the	rain	on	the	bedroom	skylight	and wondered	 what	 had	 happened.	 I	 was	 alarmed	 and	 confused.	 I	 couldn’t	 see	 a pattern	in	her	behavior;	I	saw	episodes,	and	I	rationalized	each	one.

After	weeks	of	repairs,	the	walls	and	ceiling	were	ready	for	repainting.	I	bought five	recessed	light	fixtures	for	the	kitchen.	We	needed	to	install	them	before	we painted	the	ceiling.

“It’s	a	two-man	job,	so	you	need	to	help.	You	work	in	the	attic	and	pull	the

wire	to	each	hole.	I’ll	stand	here	and	wave	a	light	through	each	hole	so	you	can

find	it.	You	push	the	wire	to	me.	I’ll	pull	it	down,	and	push	another	wire	up.	You pull	that	wire	to	the	next	hole,	and	push	it	down.	Then	I	give	you	another	wire,

and	so	on	to	the	last	hole.”

“You	should	work	in	the	attic	because	you	know	where	the	wires	go.”

“But	the	attic	over	the	kitchen	is	low.	I	will	wreck	the	ceiling	if	I	slip.	This

wiring	 should	 have	 been	 done	 before	 the	 ceiling	 was	 installed.	 If	 you	 need	 to communicate,	then	sign	through	a	hole.”

Pearl	put	on	her	overalls	and	gardening	kneepads,	and	she	climbed	the	ladder

in	the	bedroom	into	the	attic	hatch.

A	 few	 minutes	 later,	 she	 reached	 the	 kitchen	 and	 lowered	 her	 hand	 through the	first	hole.

“Turn	off	the	electricity.”

That	wasn’t	planned,	but	it	was	difficult	to	reply.	I	shut	off	the	circuit,	and	the kitchen	went	black.	I	looked	up	into	the	lamp-hole	and	saw	her	face	illuminated

by	 the	 utility	 lamp.	 I	 passed	 the	 next	 wire	 up,	 but	 Pearl	 didn’t	 take	 it.	 A	 few minutes	later,	she	climbed	down	from	the	attic	hatch,	livid.

“You	tried	to	kill	me	with	electricity!	I	pushed	the	end	of	the	wire	against	a

metal	box,	and	I	saw	 sparks! ”

“The	power	was	on	inside	the	first	wire	because	it	is	connected	to	the	kitchen,

and	 I	 wanted	 to	 have	 light.	 Now	 the	 kitchen	 is	 dark.	 You	 were	 safe.	 The insulation	protects	you.”

“No,	I	tested	you!	What	if	I	touched	the	wires	inside?”

“Nothing.	You	were	on	dry	wood.	You	were	safe.”

I	 tried	 to	 hug	 her,	 but	 she	 pulled	 back.	 We	 continued	 the	 project	 with	 our locations	 reversed;	 now,	 I	 worked	 in	 the	 attic,	 banging	 my	 head	 on	 the	 rafters.

Pearl	 was	 as	 calm	 as	 if	 she	 had	 not	 just	 had	 a	 terrified	 outburst,	 and	 again	 I assumed	that	was	the	end	of	it.





Alberta	School	for	the	Deaf

“We	need	a	vacation.	Alan	and	Rose	can	care	for	the	animals,”	signed	Pearl.

“We	do	need	a	vacation.	Where	do	you	want	to	go?”

“Alberta	by	motorcycle.	I	will	show	you	where	I	grew	up.	We	haven’t	ridden

the	 motorcycle	 since	 Mexico.	 I	 love	 the	 way	 people	 stare	 when	 we	 climb	 off your	 big	 motorcycle	 in	 our	 leather	 suits,	 and	 then	 we	 surprise	 people	 by signing.”

We	visited	Pearl’s	sisters,	her	brother,	and	a	few	deaf	friends.	Her	deaf	friends usually	 signed	 very	 swiftly,	 so	 I	 often	 spent	 my	 time	 speaking	 with	 their children.	Most	nights	we	saved	money	by	sleeping	in	sleeping	bags	on	our	hosts’

living	 room	 floors.	 We	 visited	 all	 her	 aunts	 and	 uncles	 on	 her	 mother’s	 side during	our	years	together,	but	we	never	visited	any	on	her	father’s	side.

We	 visited	 her	 uncle’s	 ranch	 in	 the	 Rocky	 Mountain	 foothills.	 His	 dogs chased	the	motorcycle	as	we	rode	to	a	mobile	home	at	the	end	of	a	gravel	road.

We	dismounted	beside	a	Dodge	pickup	truck;	firewood,	timber,	a	come-along,	a

shovel,	 and	 a	 bucket	 of	 wrenches	 lay	 in	 the	 back	 of	 it.	 Farm	 equipment	 and scraps	of	steel	lay	about.	Barbed-wire	fences	led	to	the	horizon.

I	took	off	my	gloves.	“This	property	is	huge!”

“Here	 is	 where	 I	 spent	 my	 summers,	 playing	 with	 animals	 and	 helping	 my uncle	do	chores,”	signed	Pearl,	grinning.

The	sliding	door	opened.	A	handsome,	rugged	man	with	a	tanned	face	and	a

cowboy’s	 mustache	 beckoned	 us	 into	 his	 home.	 “I’m	 glad	 you	 could	 make	 it.”

He	hugged	Pearl,	and	we	introduced	ourselves.	We	took	off	our	boots	and	went

inside.	 Like	 the	 rest	 of	 Pearl’s	 family,	 her	 uncle,	 Ernie,	 used	 only	 oral communication.

Ornate	cowboy	boots,	worn	workman’s	boots,	and	mud-covered	rubber	boots

stood	in	a	row	next	to	a	boot-jack	welded	from	horseshoes.	The	living	room	was

decorated	 with	 glittering	 trophies	 and	 photographs	 of	 draft	 horses.	 Pearl	 and	 I took	off	our	leathers	while	Ernie	made	coffee	and	tossed	pieces	of	firewood	into

the	stove.

I	 looked	 at	 his	 photographs.	 “Horses	 as	 far	 as	 the	 eye	 can	 see.	 How	 big	 is your	land?”

“It’s	160	acres.”

“How	many	horses	do	you	have	now?”	signed	Pearl.

“Five	 hundred,	 plus	 six	 Belgians.	 I	 race	 my	 Belgians	 in	 the	 draft	 horse

competitions	in	the	Calgary	Stampede.	I	do	hayrides,	too.”

“Five	hundred!	But	what	do	you	do	with	them	all?”

“He	raises	and	sells	them,”	Pearl	signed.

“This	is	as	close	as	you	can	get	to	Marlboro	country,”	he	said.

Later,	when	Pearl	was	walking	in	a	paddock,	I	asked	Ernie	where	the	horses

came	from,	how	much	they	cost,	where	they	went,	and	why	they	seemed	to	be

feral.

“Horses	 are	 my	 life.	 I	 love	 them	 more	 than	 anything.	 I	 buy	 them	 from Manitoba	PMU	farms	and	sell	them	to	Alberta	slaughterhouses.	PMU	stands	for

Pregnant	 Mare	 Urine.	 The	 farms	 breed	 mares	 and	 collect	 urine	 while	 they’re pregnant.	 It’s	 made	 into	 hormone	 pills;	 that’s	 where	 the	 brand	 Premarin	 comes from.	 I	 buy	 the	 stallions	 and	 retired	 mares,	 fatten	 them,	 and	 sell	 them	 for horsemeat.	I	could	never	bring	myself	to	tell	Pearl	the	truth.”

That	 evening,	 we	 listened	 to	 Ernie’s	 cowboy	 tales.	 Then	 we	 climbed	 into bunk	beds	in	his	spare	room	for	the	night.

For	me,	the	highlight	of	our	trip	was	our	visit	to	the	Alberta	School	for	the	Deaf.

We	walked	inside	dressed	in	full	leather,	carrying	helmets,	goggles,	and	gloves

and	looking	like	World	War	I	pilots.

A	 woman	 approached.	 She	 did	 a	 double-take.	 “My	 God!—it’s	 Pearl!”	 she

signed	and	shouted.	“I	didn’t	think	I’d	 ever	see	Pearl	again.”

The	 women	 hugged	 and	 laughed.	 “Meet	 Joan,	 the	 only	 teacher	 I	 ever	 liked.

She	didn’t	have	a	negative	attitude	like	the	other	teachers.”

“Can	we	look	around	the	school?”	I	signed.

“It	isn’t	allowed.	It’s	a	rule	here,”	Joan	signed	and	said.

“But	we	rode	from	Vancouver,”	signed	Pearl.	“When	I	graduated,	I	had	spent

most	of	my	life	inside	this	building.”

“Then	 I’ll	 escort	 you.	 The	 term	 doesn’t	 start	 until	 next	 week,	 so	 you’re lucky.”

We	walked	down	a	corridor	and	peered	in	an	open	door.	The	room	was	empty

but	 for	 a	 woman	 and	 boy.	 The	 woman	 wore	 a	 microphone-headset	 and	 was

talking	 and	 signing.	 The	 boy	 listened	 to	 her	 through	 headphones.	 Then	 a	 bell rang,	 and	 a	 red	 light	 mounted	 over	 the	 door	 spun.	 The	 teacher	 and	 student	 left the	classroom	together,	smiling	and	signing.

“That	light	looks	like	it	came	from	a	police	car,”	I	signed.

“It	 did,”	 Joan	 signed	 and	 said.	 “Usually,	 there	 are	 ten	 students,	 but	 this	 is summer	school.”

“I	had	to	sit	in	a	group	wearing	headphones	while	the	teacher	talked	without

signing,”	signed	Pearl,	as	Joan	interpreted.	“I	couldn’t	understand	anything,	so	I

didn’t	learn	anything	except	from	the	blackboard	and	books.”

“Signing	 wasn’t	 allowed.	 If	 parents	 chose	 to	 sign	 at	 home,	 that	 was	 their choice,	 but	 we	 told	 them	 that	 they	 were	 hindering	 their	 children’s	 language development.”

“I	had	to	wait	until	the	teacher	wrote	on	the	blackboard	before	I	could	learn.

It	was	like	reading	a	book	word	…	by	…	word.	It	made	me	fall	asleep!	I’m	not

good	 at	 lipreading.	 Does	 that	 mean	 I’m	 not	 allowed	 to	 learn?	 Teachers	 hit students	 who	 signed,	 but	 we	 dared	 to	 sign	 behind	 the	 teachers’	 backs	 to	 avoid going	crazy	in	class.”

“Now	we	communicate	every	way	we	can.	In	1964,	the	Babbidge	Report	on

deaf	education	concluded	that	oral	education	was	a	failure,	but	it	took	ten	years before	the	USA	passed	a	mainstreaming	act.	Canada	followed.	Pearl	missed	it.”

“Does	the	new	system	work	better?”

“There	 are	 pros	 and	 cons.	 It’s	 hard	 to	 promote	 reading	 and	 writing	 in	 a signing	environment.	In	childhood,	the	hassle	of	English	is	reduced,	but	although it’s	 easier	 to	 learn	 other	 subjects	 than	 before,	 it’s	 harder	 to	 learn	 English.	 Few graduates	 reach	 grade	 nine	 reading	 because	 English	 is	 their	 second	 language.

ASL	 is	 useless	 outside,	 so	 the	 tradeoff	 for	 using	 it	 in	 the	 classroom	 is	 further isolation	of	deafies	and	limitation	of	their	opportunities.	Limited	reading	spells limited	 thinking,	 and	 that	 means	 immaturity	 whether	 you	 are	 deaf,	 blind, hearing,	or	sighted.”

We	entered	a	dormitory.	“Look	at	those	beds	in	a	row.	We	were	punished	if

we	 didn’t	 make	 our	 beds	 perfectly	 every	 day.”	 We	 went	 into	 a	 white-tiled bathroom	 lined	 with	 washbasins	 at	 child	 height.	 “See	 this	 row	 of	 hooks?	 Our facecloths	 had	 to	 be	 hung	 by	 their	 corners	 in	 diamonds.	 The	 towels	 went	 on those	racks	and	had	to	be	in	squares.”

Pearl	 laughed	 and	 pointed	 at	 the	 bathroom	 door.	 “We	 had	 a	 lot	 of	 fun.	 One time	we	were	furious	at	the	supervisor,	so	we	soaped	the	floor.	Then	we	started

shouting	and	banging	things.	She	came	running	through	that	door,	slipped,	and

fell	flat,	sliding	along	the	floor.”

“She	was	lucky	she	wasn’t	injured,”	I	said.

“I	remember.	You	were	the	leader,”	said	Joan.

“Several	of	us	were	punished,	but	I	got	the	most	punishment.”

“How	did	she	punish	you?”	I	said.

“She	put	chairs	next	to	each	other	and	lay	a	stick	across	them.	We	had	to	put

our	hands	on	our	heads	and	balance	on	our	shins	on	the	stick—we	got	bruises!

Sometimes,	we	had	to	kneel	on	salt	or	be	spanked	in	front	of	the	other	students.”

“Pearl	arrived	a	few	years	after	we	opened,	and	she	left	a	few	years	before	we

disallowed	corporal	punishment	and	allowed	sign	language.”

“Why	didn’t	you	report	all	this	to	your	parents?”

“The	 school	 never	 punished	 us	 near	 the	 end	 of	 the	 term,	 so	 we	 didn’t	 come home	 with	 bruises.	 And	 we	 wanted	 our	 parents	 to	 think	 we	 had	 been	 good.

Punishments	made	me	tough.	When	someone	asked	if	I	was	oral	or	deaf,	I	would

answer,	‘I’m	a	rebel.’”

“Pearl	 was	a	rebel,”	Joan	signed	and	said.

“One	 time,	 my	 school	 friend	 and	 I	 were	 looking	 at	 dresses	 in	 a	 store.	 The woman	saw	our	signs	and	told	us	to	leave	because	she	thought	we	had	no	money.

So	 we	 threw	 a	 rock	 through	 the	 window	 and	 waited	 for	 the	 police.	 The policeman	did	nothing.	That	was	our	revenge	on	her.	Some	students	were	mean

to	me,	too.	Now	when	they	see	me,	they	say,	‘Remember	me	at	school?’	I	laugh

at	 them	 and	 say,	 ‘I	 forgot	 your	 name.’	 That	 lets	 them	 know	 that	 they	 are	 not important	to	me.”

I	had	an	idea.	“Can	Pearl	see	her	files?”

“Yes!	I	want	to	see	what	they	said	about	me	twenty	years	ago.”

Joan	found	her	files	in	the	storeroom.	She	untied	the	string	around	a	manila

folder,	 and	 we	 watched	 over	 Pearl’s	 shoulders	 as	 she	 flipped	 through	 thirteen years	of	her	history.	Her	report	cards	were	normal.	She	was	intelligent,	according to	an	aptitude	test,	but	I	didn’t	see	any	achievement	awards.	A	memo	between	a

psychologist	and	the	school	mentioned	something	about	counseling.	I	didn’t	see

any	 reports	 of	 incidents	 and	 punishments	 like	 the	 one	 that	 Pearl	 and	 Joan	 had just	remembered.

Pearl	closed	the	file.	“I	know	all	this.”

“I’m	 glad	 you	 visited.	 I	 may	 not	 have	 a	 job	 soon.	 We	 had	 ten	 kids	 in	 each grade	at	one	time,	but	we	are	down	to	half	of	that	now.	Nowadays,	parents	view

institutional	schools	as	a	last	resort	and	mainstream	their	children	if	they’ve	got any	hearing	at	all.”

“Mainstream	with	interpreters?”	I	said.

“Yes.	 Residential	 deaf	 schools	 cost	 four	 times	 as	 much	 as	 living	 at	 home while	 mainstreaming	 in	 public	 schools	 with	 interpreters.	 And	 mainstreamed deafies	are	less	likely	to	end	up	on	welfare.	They	live	with	their	families.	They get	a	real-world	education	in	a	real-world	environment,	so	they	learn	to	compete

in	the	real	world.	The	deafies	are	interacting	with	hearing	kids,	and	the	hearing kids	 are	 interacting	 with	 deafie	 kids.	 That	 gives	 the	 hearies	 and	 the	 deafies respect	for	each	other,	and	it	gives	the	deafies	self-respect.	It’s	difficult	to	help children	mature	inside	an	institution.”

Alan	 and	 Rose	 bought	 a	 mare	 named	 Yarby	 and	 boarded	 her	 with	 us.	 Pearl taught	me	how	to	saddle	and	ride,	at	first	in	our	fields	and	then	on	the	trails	near

the	lake.	I	rode	Mouse	while	she	rode	Yarby,	her	ponytail	bouncing.	We	would pause	 on	 the	 trail	 to	 pick	 the	 salmonberries	 from	 places	 higher	 than	 the	 deer could	reach.	I	kept	a	photo	of	Pearl	riding	Yarby	on	my	desk.

Pearl	 and	 I	 prepared	 for	 winter.	 We	 seeded	 the	 pastures	 with	 rye.	 We

wheelbarrowed	rows	of	 firewood	into	the	 basement	lest	snow,	 injury,	or	illness prevent	 it	 when	 it	 was	 most	 needed.	 I	 installed	 floodlights	 atop	 our	 new	 barn power	 pole,	 ending	 the	 need	 for	 flashlights	 at	 chore	 time	 but	 also	 ending	 the magic	of	the	night.

Pearl	dropped	our	mail	onto	the	table,	all	of	it	opened.	She	held	up	a	brochure

for	 Conservation	and	Outdoor	Recreation	Education,	the	course	required	before applying	for	a	hunting	license.

“What	is	this?”

“I	 was	 thinking	 of	 getting	 a	 hunting	 license	 so	 we	 can	 have	 venison.	 Ralph suggested	I	buy	a	bow	but	shoot	the	deer	by	the	barn.”	I	picked	up	another	letter.

“The	Elks	are	inviting	me	to	join.”

“The	Elks	are	against	signing.	They	say	they	support	the	deaf,	but	they	only

support	the	Hearing	Resource	Centre	for	oral	deafies.”

“I	won’t	join.	We	are	too	busy,	and	it’s	all	old	people.”

It	 was	 a	 mistake—I	 should	 have	 seized	 the	 chance	 to	 get	 to	 know	 Pearl’s family.

Clifford	urged	me	to	pay	Frank	the	rest	of	our	holdback,	now	with	Frank’s	legal

fees	 added	 to	 it.	 We	 surrendered	 and	 paid	 Frank	 the	 $10,000	 holdback	 plus $3,000	for	both	lawyers.	We	had	lost	a	year,	and	we	still	had	to	repair	more	of

his	work.

So	the	water	wouldn’t	freeze,	I	bypassed	the	plumbing	Frank	had	put	in	the

attic	 with	 new	 pipes	 in	 the	 basement.	 We	 patched	 Frank’s	 dozens	 of	 drywall faults.	I	resumed	MBA	classes.	The	long	joint	baths	that	Pearl	and	I	took	became

separate	 quick	 showers	 as	 my	 classes,	 her	 post	 office	 shift	 work,	 and	 our renewed	home	construction	projects	gently	brushed	our	romance	aside.

Father	helped	me	to	slaughter	both	pigs.	It	was	physically	demanding	work,	and

slaughtering	each	pig	took	hours.

The	 next	 morning,	 Pearl	 and	 I	 began	 to	 butcher	 the	 sides	 by	 following Morton’s	book, Meat	Curing	Made	Easy.	I	sawed	and	trimmed;	Pearl	wrapped, weighed,	 labeled,	 and	 kept	 the	 records;	 and	 we	 carried	 armfuls	 of	 brown packages	downstairs	to	the	freezer.	We	put	the	bacon	in	trays	for	curing	and	the

remainders	in	pails	for	sausages.

After	twelve	hours	of	butchering,	I	signed.	“My	arms	are	falling	off.”

“We	made	100	kilos	of	pork—that’s	500	servings!”

Every	 evening	 for	 a	 week,	 we	 made	 bacon	 and	 sausages.	 We	 rubbed	 curing salt	into	the	bellies	and	back	bacon.	We	ground	the	remainders	with	goat	meat,

garlic,	 pepper,	 salt,	 and	 spices.	 Pearl	 fed	 handfuls	 of	 meat	 into	 the	 electric grinder	while	I	twisted	the	casings	off	the	spout,	sausage	after	sausage.

Even	 though	 we	 were	 exhausted,	 we	 knew	 it	 was	 worthwhile	 when	 we	 ate

leek-and-potato	 soup,	 pork	 tenderloin	 stuffed	 with	 chèvre,	 and	 the	 last	 of	 our home-grown	vegetables.

“Everything	was	made	here:	pork,	milk,	cheese,	vegetables,	pickles,	and	even

our	water.	And	we	are	warm	because	of	our	firewood,”	I	signed.

“I	ache,	but	it	is	hard	for	me	to	explain	how	wonderful	I	feel.	Frank	is	gone,

and	the	pieces	of	a	good	life	are	coming	together.”

I	 cut	 a	 Christmas	 tree	 for	 our	 second	 Bowen	 Island	 Christmas.	 Pearl	 gathered holly	and	made	a	wreath	for	the	door.	Our	dusty	home	looked	cozy.

At	 the	 company	 Christmas	 party,	 my	 boss’s	 boss,	 a	 Dutch	 aristocrat,	 met Pearl	 and	 liked	 her	 immediately.	 He	 was	 so	 taken	 by	 her	 that	 he	 made	 an exception	to	the	couples-can’t-sit-together	rule	and	asked	Pearl	to	sit	beside	him, with	 me	 on	 the	 other	 side	 of	 her	 to	 be	 their	 interpreter.	 Sometimes,	 they	 wrote notes	so	I	could	eat.

At	the	end	of	the	evening,	he	wanted	to	keep	the	notepad,	but	Pearl	yanked	it

from	 his	 hands—she	 never	 liked	 others	 to	 keep	 her	 notes.	 He	 was	 startled	 that the	 pleasant	 guest,	 whose	 company	 he	 had	 enjoyed	 all	 evening,	 had	 two	 sides.

I’ll	never	forget	his	sarcastic	remark:	“What	a	 charming	guest.”

“Look	 at	 this	 advertisement	 in	 the	 Undercurrent,”	 signed	 Pearl.	 “A	 new	 king-size	futon	for	twenty-five	percent	off.	We	can	keep	our	old	bed	for	visitors.”

I	called	the	advertiser,	and	we	drove	to	her	house	at	the	end	of	a	lane	behind	a

paddock	with	two	sheep.	A	huge	beige	cylinder	lay	across	her	living	room	floor.

We	offered	the	owner,	Arlette,	half	the	new	price.	She	declined,	and	we	left.	A

week	later,	we	bought	a	new	futon	from	the	store	where	Arlette	had	bought	hers,

and	I	built	a	storage	box	underneath	it.

24	December	1986	 was	Christmas	Eve,	 Pearl’s	birthday,	and	 our	anniversary.	I

added	two	diamonds	to	her	wedding	ring,	even	though	it	was	money	that	would

have	 been	 better	 spent	 on	 the	 house.	 Pearl	 was	 proud	 of	 it.	 I	 built	 a	 television into	the	dashboard	of	the	truck,	something	unheard	of	in	those	days.

The	 telephone	 rang.	 “Derrick,	 this	 is	 Donna	 at	 the	 Bowen	 Building	 Centre.

Pearl	won	our	Christmas	raffle—a	clock	radio!	Should	we	put	her	ticket	back	in

the	bin?”	She	giggled	crassly.

“Pearl	wants	her	prize.	We’ll	be	right	over.”

We	drove	to	the	store,	and	Donna	handed	Pearl	her	radio.

“I	 enter	 every	 contest	 I	 can.	 Deaf	 people	 have	 hearing	 friends,	 so	 we	 need radios.	Should	blind	people	have	no	TVs?”

While	we	were	talking	to	Donna,	a	Toyota	pickup	parked	next	to	our	Nissan,

and	Arlette	walked	in.

“You	can	have	our	futon	for	half	price.	No	one	else	was	interested.”	Arlette

grumbled,	as	if	we	were	ripping	her	off.

“It’s	too	late.	We	just	bought	a	new	one.”

“What?	 Why	 didn’t	 you	 call	 me	 first?”	 Arlette	 glared	 at	 me	 as	 if	 I	 had disrespected	her	by	declining	her	first	offer.

I	tried	to	be	friendly,	but	Arlette	had	taken	a	dislike	to	me.	Our	paths	would

cross	later	on.

Part	III:	Divided	by	Destiny





I	Want	a	Baby

Blaze	 arrived,	 Gus’s	 family’s	 second	 horse.	 Mouse,	 Senator,	 and	 Yarby	 knew their	stalls,	so	within	a	day,	four	horses	entered	the	barn	in	single	file	at	feeding time,	 each	 going	 to	 his	 stall	 as	 if	 he	 could	 read	 the	 name	 sign	 I	 put	 over	 his manger.

“Trout	Lake	Farm	is	now	profitable	even	 before	tax	refunds,”	I	signed.

We	 continued	 to	 finish	 the	 house	 out	 of	 our	 cash	 flow.	 I	 installed	 a	 central vacuum	cleaning	system.	The	house	wasn’t	yet	carpeted,	but	now	it	was	easy	to

vacuum	the	dust.

Snow	 covered	 Bowen	 Island	 in	 white.	 With	 snow	 on	 the	 ground,	 we	 had	 to walk	 up	 and	 down	 the	 hill	 with	 backpacks	 and	 flashlights	 twice	 a	 day,	 but	 no pipes	 froze,	 and	 there	 was	 plenty	 of	 firewood	 in	 the	 basement.	 The	 floodlights on	the	trail	to	the	barn	made	the	chores	easier,	but	because	they	obliterated	the stars,	we	often	left	them	turned	off	on	clear	nights.	We	felt	like	we	were	living	in a	fairy	tale.

In	February,	I	left	for	a	one-week	business	trip.	Pearl	drove	me	to	the	airport,	and she	promised	to	pick	me	up	when	I	returned.

I	 arrived	 at	 the	 Chicago	 Hilton	 at	 midnight.	 As	 soon	 as	 I	 fell	 asleep,	 the telephone	rang.

“This	 is	 the	 Vancouver	 Message	 Relay	 Centre.	 Pearl	 King	 is	 calling	 for Derrick	King.”

“Go	ahead.”

“Why	didn’t	you	call	to	tell	me	you	arrived?”

“I	told	you,	I	will	not	call	from	the	hotel	telephone.	It	is	too	expensive.	I	said I	 would	 call	 you	 from	 the	 office	 tomorrow.	 It	 is	 three	 in	 the	 morning,	 and	 you woke	me	up.”

“You	didn’t	tell	me	your	room	number.	The	receptionist	had	to	ask.”

“I	 told	 you	 my	 flights	 and	 my	 hotel.	 Rooms	 are	 assigned	 after	 you	 arrive.

You’ve	stayed	in	hotels	before.	You	know	that.”

“I	will	find	out.”	She	hung	up.

I	waited	for	Pearl	at	the	airport	when	I	returned.	I	waited	for	an	hour,	but	she

didn’t	arrive.	I	took	a	taxi	to	Horseshoe	Bay,	walked	onto	the	ferry,	and	walked

two	kilometers	up	the	hill	to	the	house	wearing	a	suit	and	Oxford	shoes,	carrying my	briefcase	and	suitcase.	My	feet	were	wet,	I	was	chilled	to	the	bone,	and	my

arms	were	aching.

I	 was	 furious,	 but	 the	 moment	 I	 saw	 the	 woman	 on	 the	 sofa	 who	 was

watching	 TV,	 munching	 potato	 chips,	 and	 ignoring	 me,	 I	 calmed	 down—I

realized	a	new	Pearl	had	replaced	the	old,	and	I	knew	better	than	to	get	angry.

“I	 waited	 at	 the	 airport	 for	 an	 hour.	 I	 walked	 from	 the	 ferry.	 It’s	 cold.	 Why didn’t	you	come?”

Pearl	pointed	at	the	TV	with	a	supercilious	look.	“I	ordered	cable	TV	while

you	were	away.	It’s	your	turn	to	do	the	chores.”

Pearl	slept	on	the	couch	for	the	second	time	since	we	met.

Pearl	 pointed	 to	 an	 advertisement	 in	 the	 Undercurrent.	 “A	 businessman announces	he	will	build	a	pub.	He	is	offering	a	prize	for	the	name.	I	will	enter

the	name	Bowen	Island	Pub.”

“That	name	is	too	obvious.	I	think	he	is	looking	for	a	special	name.”

“What’s	wrong	with	Bowen	Island	Pub?	What	would	you	name	it?”

“I	don’t	know,	but	Bowen	Island	Pub	sounds	too	ordinary.”

Pearl	 didn’t	 enter	 the	 contest.	 A	 few	 weeks	 later,	 the	 name	 of	 the	 pub	 was announced:	Bowen	Island	Pub.	No	one	had	entered	it,	so	the	pub	saved	itself	the

prize	expense.

Pearl	was	furious.	“You	didn’t	want	me	to	win!”

“I	 wanted	 you	 to	 win.	 That’s	 why	 I	 wanted	 you	 to	 enter	 a	 special	 name.	 I didn’t	say	you	couldn’t	enter	Bowen	Island	Pub.”

“You	want	me	to	lose!	You	hold	me	under	your	thumb!”

I	 groped	 under	 the	 truck	 seat	 for	 something	 to	 read	 while	 waiting	 in	 the	 ferry lineup,	 and	 I	 found	 a	 copy	 of	 Cosmopolitan. 	 The	 quiz	 Rate	 Your	 Husband’s Sexual	 IQ	 had	 been	 filled	 out.	 I	 was	 stunned	 to	 see	 that	 Pearl	 had	 ticked	 the boxes	for	“I	suspect	he	has	homosexual	relations”	and	“I	know	he	masturbates.”

I	thought	about	what	I	had	seen.

Sex	 with	 Pearl	 had	 been	 affectionate	 but	 little	 more,	 partly	 because	 it	 was usually	 in	 positions	 where	 we	 could	 see	 each	 other’s	 faces.	 I	 couldn’t	 see	 how our	sex	life	could	lead	her	to	think	I	was	having	sex	with	men.	Worse,	seeing	her first	husband	in	a	gay	bar	was	her	 only	justification	for	abandoning	him;	if	she now	thought	I	was	gay,	then	maybe	he	wasn’t	gay.	Not	everyone	in	a	gay	bar	is

gay;	 not	 everyone	 in	 a	 straight	 bar	 is	 straight.	 I	 didn’t	 tell	 Pearl	 I	 had	 gay colleagues	and	friends,	and	sometimes	we	drank	in	a	gay	bar	near	my	office.

“Sometimes,	 I	 become	 so	 frustrated	 with	 hearies	 that	 I	 want	 to	 cry.	 My	 elbow hurt,	 so	 I	 saw	 the	 doctor.	 She	 sent	 me	 to	 a	 specialist,	 but	 I	 went	 to	 the	 wrong office.	I	wrote	a	note	to	the	receptionist	to	call	the	doctor	to	get	the	directions.

She	 handed	 me	 the	 telephone!”	 Pearl	 slapped	 her	 forehead	 in	 frustration.	 “So	 I went	next	door,	and	that	receptionist	called	for	me.”

The	 report	 said	 Pearl	 had	 repetitive	 stress	 injury	 and	 needed	 to	 change	 her work	or	have	surgery	to	relocate	the	nerve	in	her	elbow.

“I	want	that	surgery.	If	my	elbow	gets	worse,	I	won’t	be	able	to	sign.	I	will

get	sick	leave.	Then	I	want	to	stop	the	Pill	and	have	a	baby.	I	want	a	child	at	the table	to	talk	to	you	and	sign	to	me.	Then	I	want	to	quit.”

“We	need	time.	If	you	quit	now,	we	won’t	be	able	to	finish	the	house.	Do	you

want	a	baby	to	crawl	in	the	dust	on	plywood?”

“My	parents	were	twenty	when	I	was	born.	I’m	thirty-three!	A	woman	can’t

wait	 like	 a	 man.	 Think	 of	 ideas.	 Rent	 the	 basement	 and	 the	 other	 side	 of	 the house	 for	 storage,	 or	 borrow	 money	 to	 finish	 them	 and	 rent	 them	 for	 living.	 A baby	will	not	come	for	nine	months.	Then	I	will	sell	jade.”

“No	one	rents	damp	storage,	and	we	have	two	mortgages	already.	My	mother

was	thirty-four	when	she	had	me	and	forty-two	when	she	had	my	sister.	We	need

two	salaries	for	a	year	to	finish	this	half	of	the	house.”

“Don’t	tell	me	Frank	has	stopped	me	from	having	a	baby.	He	can	go	to	hell!

Jodi	is	pregnant.	What	is	your	goal?”

“To	enjoy	our	life	and	finish	the	house,	then	have	a	family.	Let’s	do	this:	you

have	the	operation	and	take	recovery	time	off	work.	You	work	for	a	year	while	I

finish	my	MBA.	Then,	I	get	a	better	job.	We	have	a	baby,	and	you	quit.	Can	you

get	lighter	work	after	the	operation?”

“No.	 All	 deafies	 at	 the	 post	 office	 sort	 mail.	 I	 have	 decided	 to	 stop	 the	 Pill.

What	do	you	say	about	that?”

Disagreeing	 was	 not	 an	 option	 because	 I	 had	 no	 way	 of	 knowing	 whether Pearl	took	the	pills;	now	I	wondered	if	she	had	already	stopped.	It	dawned	on	me

that	neither	of	us	now	trusted	each	other;	so	much	had	changed	so	quickly.

“OK.”

Pearl	 was	 elated.	 “This	 is	 my	 only	 chance	 to	 have	 a	 child.	 I	 know	 it.”	 She kissed	me.

Although	I	loved	Pearl,	I	knew	something	wasn’t	right.	It	was	wrong	to	lie	to

her,	 but	 I	 decided	 to	 try	 to	 delay	 making	 her	 pregnant	 until	 our	 situation improved.	Our	sex	life	would	have	to	suffer—Pearl’s	questionnaire	response	“I

know	he	masturbates”	would	be	prophetic.

Pearl	 stopped	 taking	 the	 Pill	 and	 had	 the	 elbow	 operation,	 an	 outpatient procedure.	She	was	granted	leave	while	she	had	physiotherapy	for	two	months.	I

did	 the	 chores	 while	 she	 recovered.	 She	 began	 to	 sign,	 “Swim,	 swim!”	 to	 her belly	after	we	made	love.

Mothergoat	 had	 three	 kids:	 two	 bucks	 and,	 at	 last,	 a	 doe.	 We	 named	 the	 doe Scapegoat,	 put	 her	 in	 her	 own	 pen,	 and	 bottle-fed	 her,	 so	 she	 became	 as affectionate	as	a	dog.

As	I	climbed	into	the	truck	on	my	way	to	the	Fraser	Valley	Livestock	Auction

to	buy	piglets	for	the	year’s	pork,	Pearl	signed,	“Buy	a	duck	for	the	garden.”

I	returned	with	three	piglets	and	a	dozen	ducklings.	I	put	the	piglets	in	the	sty and	made	a	cat-proof	cage	for	the	ducklings.

Pearl	was	livid.	“I	wanted	a	duck	in	the	garden,	not	ducklings	in	a	box!”

“Ducklings	cost	almost	nothing,	and	you	can’t	buy	one	duck.	In	two	months,

you	can	pick	one,	and	we’ll	eat	the	others.”

“You	ignore	me!”

Pearl	ignored	me	for	the	rest	of	the	day	and	slept	on	her	edge	of	the	bed	that

night.

Her	increasing	volatility	did	nothing	to	kindle	the	flames	of	passion,	but	this

was	 fine	 with	 me	 now:	 it	 meant	 another	 night	 when	 she	 wouldn’t	 become pregnant.	And	she	couldn’t	get	pregnant	during	her	periods	and	on	MBA	nights

twice	a	week	when	I	slept	on	my	sister’s	floor.	I	was	playing	Vatican	Roulette.

Because	 Pearl	 never	 initiated	 sex,	 it	 was	 easy	 to	 avoid	 making	 love	 on	 fertile days,	 and	 when	 it	 could	 not	 be	 avoided,	 covert	 coitus	 interruptus	 was	 my frustrating	friend.

My	MBA	class	was	interrupted	by	a	knock	on	the	door.	A	woman	called	me	into

the	corridor.

“Your	 wife’s	 had	 an	 accident.	 She’s	 in	 Lions	 Gate	 Hospital.	 She	 broke	 her foot.”

I	 drove	 to	 the	 hospital.	 When	 I	 arrived	 in	 the	 emergency	 room,	 Pearl	 was sitting	in	a	chair	in	whitewashed	overalls	with	her	left	foot	in	a	gumboot	and	her right	foot	in	a	sock	on	a	stool.

“How	do	you	feel?	What	happened?”

“I	feel	…	mellow.	I	had	a	painkiller	shot.	I	was	trying	to	pour	the	food	into

the	 trough,	 but	 the	 piglets	 kept	 pushing.	 I	 kicked	 one	 on	 the	 head,	 and	 I	 broke my	toe.”

Pearl	 told	 me	 she	 had	 used	 our	 emergency	 autodialer,	 and	 the	 ambulance, police,	and	volunteer	fire	department	had	all	arrived	to	find	her	hopping	around

the	house	on	one	foot.

The	other	patients	stared	at	us.	I	couldn’t	help	but	laugh.	I	was	in	a	pinstriped suit,	while	she	looked	like	a	hillbilly,	and	we	were	talking	in	sign	language.

“She	kicked	a	pig,”	I	said,	as	if	only	the	kicking	was	unusual.

Crows	soon	discovered	the	pig	trough	and	ate	the	feed	which	the	piglets	did	not immediately	consume,	so	we	made	a	scarecrow.	We	soon	found	crows	perched

on	our	scarecrow.

“Can	you	shoot	the	crows?”	signed	Pearl.

“I	will	ask	Laurent	for	permission.”

Laurent	 was	 parked	 at	 his	 usual	 spot,	 where	 his	 presence	 calmed	 traffic.	 I explained	our	crow	problem.

“I	hate	the	filthy	scavengers.	Shoot	one—no	one’s	going	to	report	one	shot.

You	only	need	one	because	the	best	scarecrow	is	a	dead	crow.	Would	you	eat	at	a

restaurant	with	a	corpse	at	the	table?”

At	evening	chore	time,	I	brought	my	rifle	with	me.	Crows	roosted	in	the	trees

and	 on	 the	 scarecrow,	 waiting	 for	 their	 banquet.	 I	 fed	 the	 piglets	 last.	 Then	 I leaned	 against	 the	 barn,	 ready	 to	 fire,	 but	 the	 crows	 did	 not	 move.	 I	 walked inside	 the	 barn	 and	 stood	 behind	 the	 open	 door,	 but	 the	 crows	 did	 not	 move.	 I climbed	to	the	hayloft,	found	a	knothole	facing	the	sty,	and	peered	through	it.	A few	 minutes	 later,	 the	 crows	 flew	 down	 to	 the	 trough.	 I	 fired	 through	 the	 hole.

All	but	one	crow	took	flight.	The	casualty	staggered	onto	the	electric	fence	and

lay	twitching	with	each	electric	pulse,	like	Galvani’s	frog.

We	had	no	more	problems	with	crows.

“It’s	the	middle	of	summer,”	signed	Pearl.	“We	need	a	holiday.	We	could	buy	a

camper.	It	can	pay	for	itself,	and	we	can	also	use	it	to	sleep	downtown.”

We	bought	a	mildewed,	wood-frame	camper	with	no	shower	or	toilet,	and	we

cleaned	 it	 up.	 A	 few	 days	 later,	 when	 Pearl	 arrived	 home	 from	 work,	 she	 was delighted	 to	 find	 me	 inside	 it	 preparing	 a	 propane-cooked	 dinner	 under	 its battery-powered	lights.

I	 soon	 learned	 we	 needed	 to	 buy	 booster	 springs,	 extra-wide	 truck	 mirrors, and	 tie-down	 bars.	 If	 we	 had	 known	 the	 expense	 of	 modifying	 our	 truck,	 we would	not	have	bought	the	camper.	To	save	money,	I	had	a	tie-down	bar	installed

only	in	the	front.

Alan	and	Rose	relieved	our	chores	for	a	week	while	we	drove	north	to	visit

Pearl’s	other	uncle	and	her	grandparents.	The	heavy	camper	on	the	back	of	the

light	pickup	made	driving	hard	work.	Our	tempers	flared	as	the	overloaded	truck

swayed	on	the	highway.

I	turned	on	the	stereo.	Pearl	turned	the	volume	all	the	way	up.	She	closed	her

eyes	 and	 listened	 to	 Sultans	 of	 Swing	 while	 Whisky	 cowered	 behind	 us	 at	 the deafening	blast.	When	the	song	was	over,	I	reduced	the	volume.

“I	dreamed	I	was	dancing,”	Pearl	signed,	as	she	turned	the	volume	all	the	way

up	and	blocked	the	control	with	her	hand.

I	turned	the	stereo	off.

“Why	did	you	do	that?	I	want	to	listen.	I	can’t	watch	TV	because	there	are	no

TV	stations	here.	It’s	my	right	to	listen!”

“I	will	turn	on	the	stereo.	Turn	it	up	until	you	can	hear	it.”

Pearl	turned	the	volume	until	it	was	all	the	way	up.

I	turned	it	off.	“I	don’t	want	to	become	deaf	or	have	an	accident.”

A	patrol	car’s	lights	flashed,	so	I	pulled	over.	I	rolled	down	the	window	as	the

policeman	approached.	Whisky	barked	as	Pearl	held	him	back.

“Your	 license,	 registration,	 and	 insurance,	 please,”	 said	 the	 constable.	 “I clocked	you	at	fifteen	over	the	limit	going	down	the	hill.”

I	 opened	 my	 document	 wallet	 and	 handed	 it	 to	 him;	 my	 Reserve	 Police	 ID

card	was	opposite	my	driver’s	license.	The	constable	returned	my	wallet,	made

small	talk,	and	drove	away.

“No	ticket!	Before	I	quit	the	reserve	police,	I	got	a	replacement	card.	I	handed

in	 the	 new	 one	 when	 I	 quit,	 and	 I	 kept	 this	 old	 one	 because	 policemen	 don’t ticket	policemen.”

Pearl	seemed	unnerved	by	my	subterfuge.

At	the	end	of	each	day’s	driving	ordeal,	we	looked	for	a	clearing	at	the	end	of

a	dirt	road,	and	we	hid	from	the	world.	We	never	stayed	in	public	campgrounds.

For	 security,	 we	 kept	 my	 shotgun	 under	 the	 mattress,	 which	 was	 legal	 in	 those days.	 I	 mixed	 margaritas	 from	 the	 icebox;	 Pearl	 cooked	 dinner	 on	 the	 propane stove;	we	played	with	Whisky;	we	panned	for	gold	in	the	Cariboo	creeks.	After

dinner,	Pearl	read	 Cosmopolitan	and	 Silent	News	while	I	read	books	and	listened to	 the	 plaintive	 call	 of	 loons.	 Fortunately	 for	 covert	 family	 planning,	 it	 wasn’t easy	to	have	sex	in	the	low	cab-over	bed.

The	 highlight	 of	 our	 trip	 was	 our	 visit	 to	 Fort	 St.	 John	 to	 see	 more	 of	 her relatives,	 sleeping	 in	 our	 camper	 in	 their	 driveways.	 All	 were	 happy	 to	 see Pearl’s	life	going	well.

Her	 maternal	 grandfather	 was	 one	 of	 the	 first	 farmers	 in	 the	 area	 and	 a fundamentalist	 Seventh-day	 Adventist.	 He	 was	 the	 co-founder	 of	 the	 World Invitational	 Gold	 Panning	 Championships,	 the	 Dorse	 Prosser	 Adventist

Elementary	School,	and	the	Fort	St.	John	North	Peace	Museum.	He	showed	us

the	 museum,	 and	 his	 home	 had	 even	 more	 settlers’	 artifacts.	 As	 a	 going-away present,	 he	 gave	 us	 the	 oak	 hand-cranked	 telephone,	 which	 had	 hung	 on	 his kitchen	wall	for	thirty	years	to	communicate	with	friends	and	family	twenty	km

away.

Her	uncle	Karl’s	living	room	displayed	a	framed	copy	of	the	1979	entry	in	the

Guinness	Book	of	World	Records	for	the	“Jade	boulder	Karl	discovered	in	1977

in	Watson	Lake.	It	weighs	63,307	pounds.”	A	green	boulder	stood	next	to	a	rock saw	and	piles	of	jade	pieces	in	his	back	yard.	He	gave	us	a	fist-sized	piece.	Karl told	 us	 that	 he	 had	 been	 prospecting	 and	 carving	 Yukon	 jade	 and	 selling	 it	 to Alaska	Highway	tourists	for	years.	Pearl	reminded	him	that	she	was	keen	to	sell

his	jade.

As	we	were	leaving,	Karl	revealed	to	me	that	he	hadn’t	discovered	the	jade;	a

metal	 mine	 had	 found	 it,	 and	 he’d	 bought	 it.	 He’d	 reported	 his	 “discovery”	 to Guinness	as	a	marketing	ploy.	Karl’s	jade	was	like	Ernie’s	horsemeat:	everyone

in	the	family	knew	the	truth	except	Pearl,	and	I’m	sad	to	say	I	kept	their	secrets, too.	Our	collective	silence	only	served	to	make	the	complex	reality	of	life	more

difficult	for	her	to	see.

On	the	last	day	of	the	trip,	we	took	a	gravel	road.	Because	I	had	bought	only

one	tie-down	bar,	when	the	truck	pitched	on	a	bump,	the	loose	camper	dented	the

roof	 of	 the	 cab.	 Pearl	 was	 furious	 at	 me,	 and	 I	 became	 furious	 with	 her.	 I	 had done	all	the	planning,	preparation,	and	driving,	so	I	parked	and	told	her	to	drive home	or	to	shut	up.	She	refused	to	do	either;	instead,	she	complained	bitterly	that I	was	controlling	her.

Pearl	signed,	“We	should	see	a	marriage	counselor.”

“First,	 you	 should	 see	 a	 doctor	 about	 your	 sensitivity	 and	 anger.	 If	 your doctor	 asks	 me	 to	 come,	 I	 will	 come.	 Then,	 after	 you	 feel	 better,	 we	 can	 see	 a marriage	counselor.”

“We	can’t	waste	any	more	time.	It’s	month	four	without	the	Pill,	and	I’m	not

pregnant,	so	you	need	to	be	tested.”

“Me?	Let’s	be	logical.	You	had	womb	surgery;	how	do	you	know	there	was

no	damage?	You	should	get	tested	first.”

“We	will	not	have	sex	until	I	see	a	report	about	your	semen.”

“If	 you	 are	 sure	 you	 can	 get	 pregnant,	 then	 you	 must	 have	 been	 pregnant before.	You	have	no	stretch	marks,	so	you	had	an	abortion.”

Pearl	 was	 startled.	 “I	 got	 pregnant	 when	 I	 lived	 with	 Eddy.	 I	 didn’t	 want	 to marry	him,	so	I	had	an	abortion.”

Pearl	told	me	this	dispassionately.	She	had	withheld	her	abortion	from	me—

but	I	was	no	better	because	I	was	concealing	my	clandestine	birth	control	from

her.

“I	told	you	he	is	an	alcoholic	with	bad	genes.”

I	began	to	wonder	if	Eddy	really	was	an	alcoholic.	My	concern	about	Pearl’s

mental	health	increased.

“No	sex	until	your	test.	Your	balls	must	be	full.”

“What	if	I	fail	the	test?”

“We	will	adopt	a	black	baby.	White	babies	are	not	available.”

“I	will	take	a	test.”

I	was	happy	to	take	a	test	because	“we	will	not	have	sex	until”	would	delay

pregnancy.	 The	 first	 step	 was	 for	 us	 to	 see	 our	 family	 doctor.	 I	 booked	 an appointment	for	two	weeks	later.

The	doctor	told	us	we	should	wait	nine	months	before	a	semen	test	because

the	odds	at	our	age	after	four	months	were	only	fifty	percent,	but	Pearl	talked	her into	authorizing	it.

I	stalled	for	two	weeks	before	taking	the	test,	then	I	waited	a	week	to	inform

Pearl	after	the	doctor	called	me	to	tell	me	my	result	was	normal.

“The	doctor	must	tell	me,”	she	signed.

I	booked	another	appointment.	Two	weeks	later,	the	doctor	told	us	the	result

and	urged	Pearl	to	relax	and	be	patient.

That	night,	Pearl	signed.	“The	lab	didn’t	see	you	shoot	into	the	bottle,	so	you

borrowed	semen	from	a	friend	to	hide	your	vasectomy.”

“Leo,	would	you	jerk	off	for	me?	No	man	would	do	that!”

Perhaps	 she	 believed	 me,	 because	 she	 didn’t	 mention	 infertility	 again.	 I’m sure	we	both	knew	we	couldn’t	go	on	like	this,	yet	we	both	went	on.

The	ducks	had	grown	up.	Pearl	no	longer	wanted	a	duck	in	the	garden.	We	killed

and	 cleaned	 them	 together.	 Decapitation	 was	 easy;	 the	 hard	 work	 was	 holding the	duck	to	avoid	being	bruised	while	the	headless	duck	flapped	violently.	Pearl

didn’t	 want	 to	 swing	 the	 ax,	 so	 she	 was	 the	 one	 to	 hold	 each	 duck	 and	 get bruised.	We	didn’t	know	the	technique	of	stuffing	a	bird	in	a	sack	with	its	head

sticking	out	of	a	hole.	It	took	us	a	dozen	hours	to	clean	and	pluck	a	dozen	ducks.

We	never	did	it	again.

“Where	is	your	elbow	report	from	the	doctor?	I	need	it	for	the	insurance	claim.”

“It’s	in	my	bag.”

I	looked	in	her	bag	for	her	medical	report,	and	I	found	it.	I	also	found	a	letter: Dear	Mrs.	King:

Re:	Your	Letter

Thank	you	for	your	interest	in	cochlear	implants	and	your	kind	offer	to	be	a

research	patient.	We	appreciate	your	confidence.

Please	be	advised	that	the	procedure	is	still	experimental	and	could	result	in total	loss	of	hearing;	therefore,	we	do	not	consider	for	experimental	surgery	any patients	with	any	residual	hearing,	however	minimal,	such	as	yourself.

Cochlear	 implants	 are	 being	 improved	 in	 both	 efficacy	 and	 safety	 and	 we hope	in	the	future	to	be	able	to	aid	you.

Sincerely,	Dr.	H	S	Smith

The	 letter	 was	 a	 month	 old.	 I	 put	 the	 letter	 and	 the	 elbow	 report	 on	 the	 table.

When	Pearl	saw	the	letter,	she	became	angry.

“Why	did	you	take	that	letter?”

“Why	did	you	keep	it	a	secret?”

“Because	you	would	try	to	prevent	my	implant.	You	prefer	I	stay	deaf.”

This	was	the	most	painful	thing	Pearl	had	ever	said	to	me.	Cupid’s	arrow	was

a	distant	memory	now.

“What	can	I	say?	If	I	say	I	prefer	a	deafie,	you	will	think	I	love	you	because

you	are	deaf.	If	I	say	I	prefer	a	hearie,	you	will	think	I	don’t	love	you	as	you	are.

“I	 often	 lie	 in	 bed	 wishing	 I	 could	 do	 what	 my	 sisters	 did	 when	 they	 heard something—hear	 that	 sound	 and	 know	 what	 it	 is.	 I	 think	 hearing	 would	 be convenient,	that’s	all.”

Pearl	invited	a	dozen	guests	to	her	Labor	Day	long	weekend	deaf	party.	I	invited

Stanley,	Gertrude,	and	Ralph,	but	Stanley	and	Gertrude	couldn’t	come.

Ralph	was	the	first	to	arrive.	He	came	up	the	driveway	in	his	jeep	and,	to	my

surprise,	escorted	a	brunette	to	the	door.

“Adele,	meet	Pearl	and	Derrick.”

Adele	 offered	 her	 hand	 for	 a	 handshake,	 and	 I	 realized	 she	 was	 blind.	 Pearl shook	 her	 hand,	 too,	 and	 we	 invited	 them	 inside.	 Ralph	 guided	 Adele	 by	 the elbow	into	the	kitchen.	A	flashlight	hung	from	his	belt.

“Don’t	you	trust	my	electricity?”	I	signed	and	said.

“I’d	wear	one	if	I	were	you—for	when	the	time	comes.”

“You	said	Ralph	was	single,”	signed	Pearl.

“I	 was	single,	but	we	met	on	a	blind	date.”

“I	 was	 Ralph’s	 Braille	 teacher,”	 said	 Adele.	 “I	 moved	 in	 with	 Ralph	 last month	when	my	youngest	child	moved	out.”

“You	guys	talk	while	I	unload	the	jeep.”

Ralph	returned	with	two	suitcases	and	a	carton	labeled	Baxter-Travenol.	Pearl

went	to	pick	up	her	guests	while	I	did	the	chores,	and	Ralph	and	Adele	walked

around	the	property.

Pearl	returned	with	her	guests	in	the	back	of	our	truck.	Jodi	greeted	me	as	I

lowered	 the	 tailgate.	 The	 guests	 jumped	 down,	 each	 with	 booze	 and	 a	 sleeping bag.	Whisky	was	delighted	to	make	new	friends.

As	evening	fell,	we	started	a	bonfire	and	roasted	wieners.	I	baked	potatoes	on

Pearl’s	propane	barbecue.	We	laughed,	signed,	ate,	and	drank.

Then	Ralph,	Adele,	and	I	went	inside	to	talk.

“It’s	better	for	us	inside.	The	deafies	don’t	have	to	slow	down	their	ASL	for me,	and	I	don’t	have	to	interpret	you	for	them.”

“You	can	sign,”	said	Adele,	“so	why	don’t	you	like	to	do	it?”

I	 nodded	 without	 speaking,	 then,	 realizing	 my	 mistake,	 spoke	 without

signing.	“Even	though	I	know	enough	sign	language	for	her	friends	to	talk	to	me

when	they	want	to,	we	don’t	have	much	to	talk	about.	And	if	they	slow	down	for

me	 for	 too	 long,	 I	 know	 I’m	 imposing,	 like	 at	 a	 cosmopolitan	 party	 where	 the foreign	guests	are	speaking	English	just	to	be	polite.”

“If	 you	 have	 no	 mutual	 friends,	 there	 will	 be	 no	 one	 to	 help	 you	 stay	 as	 a couple	through	tough	times,”	said	Adele.

“I	know,	but	it’s	hard.	Pearl	lives	with	one	foot	in	the	Vancouver	deaf	world

and	 the	 other	 foot	 in	 the	 Bowen	 Island	 hearing	 world.	 She’d	 get	 lonely	 if	 she didn’t	work	downtown,	yet	she	wants	to	have	a	kid	and	quit.”

Bursts	of	laughter,	clinking	bottles,	the	smell	of	marijuana,	and	the	crackle	of

burning	 wood	 came	 through	 the	 open	 windows	 and	 door—but	 not	 a	 single

human	voice,	like	a	movie	sound-effects	track.	Now	and	then,	the	plywood	floor

thundered	from	the	impact	of	boots	as	revelers	went	to	the	refrigerator	for	a	beer.

The	sky	turned	purple.

“Adele,	did	you	know	Ralph	is	looking	at	the	girls?”	I	said.

She	laughed.	“If	I	worried	about	things	I	can’t	see,	I’d	go	crazy.”

“Pearl	worries	about	the	things	she	can’t	hear,	and	she	goes	crazy.”

“You	said	she	wanted	to	start	a	business.	What	sort?”	said	Ralph.

“Selling	her	uncle’s	jade.	Renting	unfinished	space	in	the	house.”

“I	 have	 another	 idea:	 build	 a	 shooting	 range,	 and	 start	 a	 gun	 club.	 Many people	 here	 shoot.	 I’m	 sure	 you	 can	 get	 permission	 for	 an	 underground	 range.

Bury	sewer	pipe,	add	lights	and	ventilation,	and	there’s	your	business!	You	can

stock	it	with	provisions,	and	there’s	your	banker	bunker!	And	you	can	rent	it	out for	birthday	parties.”

Ralph	laughed,	but	he	wasn’t	joking.	The	Soviet	Union	was	collapsing,	and	it

felt	 like	 anything	 could	 happen.	 Pearl	 had	 no	 interest	 in	 survivalism,	 but	 she loved	the	back-to-the-land	life	to	which	it	was	related.

“You	can	get	an	ultralight	plane,	store	it	in	your	barn,	and	use	your	field	as	an airstrip.	There’s	 so	much	you	can	do.”

“First,	I’d	need	to	clear	the	stumps	from	the	upper	field.”

“Get	a	copy	of	the	 Blaster’s	Handbook	and	a	blasting	license;	you	just	fill	in the	forms.	After	the	reference	check,	buy	dynamite,	caps,	and	fuses.	Bring	them

over	 on	 the	 weekly	 ‘dangerous	 goods’	 ferry.	 You’ll	 meet	 interesting	 people	 on that	boat!	You’ll	need	an	auger,	some	old	carpets,	and	some	old	tires	to	keep	the rocks	from	flying.”

“That	sounds	like	fun.	Let’s	do	it	together.”

Ralph	 looked	 at	 his	 watch.	 “It’s	 time	 for	 an	 exchange.”	 He	 went	 to	 the bedroom	 and	 returned	 with	 a	 suitcase,	 a	 handful	 of	 metal	 rods,	 and	 two	 plastic bags,	 one	 full	 of	 liquid.	 The	 suitcase	 was	 packed	 with	 hoses,	 valves,	 and connectors.	Ralph	put	the	bag	of	liquid	in	the	microwave	and,	while	it	warmed,

assembled	the	poles	into	a	stand.	He	hung	the	bag	from	the	pole	and	pulled	up

his	shirt	to	expose	two	catheters.

“I’m	 on	 Continuous	 Ambulatory	 Peritoneal	 Dialysis.	 Diabetics	 are	 prone	 to kidney	disease,	and	I	drew	the	short	straw.	If	I	change	the	fluid	four	times	a	day, take	vitamin	supplements,	and	eat	bananas,	I	feel	fine.	If	I	don’t,	I’ll	die.”

Ralph	 drew	 insulin	 into	 a	 syringe	 and	 injected	 the	 bag	 of	 liquid.	 He

disinfected	his	catheters	and	connected	them	with	hoses	to	the	bags.	He	put	the

empty	 bag	 on	 the	 floor	 and	 opened	 a	 valve;	 straw-colored	 liquid	 flowed	 out	 of his	 belly.	 Everyone	 who	 passed	 by	 on	 the	 way	 to	 the	 refrigerator	 stopped	 to stare.

Half	 an	 hour	 later,	 he	 closed	 the	 first	 valve	 and	 opened	 the	 second.	 Clear liquid	ran	from	the	bag	on	the	stand	into	his	belly.

Pearl	walked	in.	“What	is	Ralph	doing?	All	my	friends	are	asking	me.”

“He	has	kidney	disease.	He	has	to	do	this	four	times	a	day.”

Ralph	disconnected	the	tubes,	disinfected	the	catheters,	closed	his	pants,	and

washed	up.	We	walked	outside	and	joined	the	party.	Sparks	from	the	bonfire	rose

like	fireflies.	A	man	handed	his	joint	to	Ralph.	He	took	a	toke	and	passed	it	to

me.

Adele,	 Ralph,	 and	 I	 went	 back	 inside.	 I	 put	 a	 Moody	 Blues	 cassette	 in	 the stereo	and	lit	the	kerosene	lantern.	We	listened	to	“Melancholy	Man.”

“Do	you	have	a	TV?”	said	Adele,	who	was	sitting	in	front	of	it.

“Pearl	 has	 a	 TV.	 I	 don’t	 like	 it.	 There’s	 too	 much	 noise	 and	 violence,”	 I replied.

“I	disagree,”	said	Ralph.	“There	isn’t	 enough	violence	on	TV.	There	would	be less	violence	in	the	real	world	if	the	imitation	world	were	more	realistic.	What

happens	when	you	kill	on	TV?”

“The	victim	falls	over.	Then	blood	dribbles	out.”

“Exactly!	That’s	not	realistic!	When	a	man	is	shot,	he	pisses,	shits,	convulses,

and	 gets	 a	 hard-on!	 If	 TV	 did	 a	 better	 job	 of	 presenting	 death,	 there	 would	 be less	killing	in	real	life!”

In	the	morning,	Adele	sat	with	Ralph	while	he	exchanged	his	fluids.	I	did	the

chores	 and	 woke	 the	 deafies	 sleeping	 in	 the	 hayloft.	 Pearl	 woke	 the	 deafies sleeping	 around	 the	 house	 and	 cooked	 a	 delicious	 breakfast	 of	 grilled	 chèvre with	 our	 homemade	 back	 bacon.	 Pearl	 drove	 her	 guests	 to	 the	 ferry.	 Then	 the

four	of	us	sat	down	to	talk.

“Did	you	talk	to	a	blind	woman	before?”	Ralph	asked	Pearl.

“I	talked	to	deaf-blind	using	hand-spelling,	but	not	blind.”

“Me,	 too,”	 said	 Adele,	 “deaf-blind,	 but	 not	 deaf-only.	 You	 and	 I	 could	 talk using	hand-spelling,	but	it	is	faster	to	have	Derrick	interpret.	It	is	hard	for	me	to imagine	life	without	ears.	What	do	you	feel	when	you	hold	a	cat	that	is	purring?”

“When	I	hold	a	cat	that	is	purring,	I	hear	it	purring	in	my	mind.	When	I	take

my	hands	off,	then	I	don’t	hear	it	purring.	This	morning,	I	heard	the	bacon	frying in	the	pan,	but	when	I	looked	away,	I	didn’t	hear	it.	If	I	watch	a	television	show that’s	captioned,	I	hear	the	words,	but	if	I	look	away,	I	hear	nothing.	Get	it?”

“I	think	so.	When	people	are	talking,	I	see	them	in	my	mind,	but	when	they

are	silent,	they	disappear.	Can	you	speak?”

“A	 little,	 but	 I	 gave	 up.	 It	 frustrated	 me	 that	 most	 hearing	 people	 can’t understand	 my	 speech	 after	 I	 learned	 it	 in	 school.	 It	 is	 hard	 to	 talk	 when	 you can’t	hear	what	you	are	saying.”

“Deafies	believe	deafness	is	only	an	inconvenience,”	I	signed	and	said.

“Yes.	For	example,	I	can	drive,	but	I	can’t	use	the	telephone,”	signed	Pearl.

“I	can	use	the	telephone,	but	I	can’t	drive!”	said	Adele.

“Could	you	ever	see?”

“I	had	a	normal	childhood,	but	I	went	blind	through	illness.	My	ex-husband

was	sighted.”	Adele	held	Ralph’s	hand.	“The	kids	helped	me	after	he	left	me.	I

don’t	know	what	I	would	have	done	without	children.	Do	you	love	Pearl	because

she	is	quiet?”

I	laughed.	“No!	She	doesn’t	realize	how	much	noise	she	makes.”

“Why	didn’t	you	join	us	outside	for	a	longer	time?”

“You	 enjoyed	 looking	 at	 the	 fire,	 and	 we	 enjoyed	 listening	 to	 music.	 We enjoyed	ourselves	in	our	own	way,”	Adele	said.

“Say,	since	you	have	only	a	two-wheel-drive	truck,	why	don’t	you	get	a	four-

wheel-drive	 jeep,	 too?”	 Ralph	 said.	 “I	 know	 where	 two	 grand	 will	 buy	 you	 an ex-military	 jeep	 that	 will	 climb	 a	 seventy	 percent	 grade,	 pull	 stumps,	 and	 haul logs.”

“That’s	a	good	idea,”	signed	Pearl.	“No	more	up-and-down	trips	to	pick	each

other	up.	No	more	hitchhiking.	Let’s	see	one.”

I	 came	 home	 while	 Pearl	 was	 doing	 chores	 and	 saw	 the	 lamp	 flashing	 on	 our answering	 machine.	 I	 pushed	 the	 button	 and	 heard	 a	 missed-call	 message,	 so	 I reset	the	machine.

At	dinner,	I	took	a	book	from	my	briefcase.	“I	got	this	at	the	used	bookstore:

the	 Blaster’s	Handbook.	Ralph	and	I	are	going	to	blow	up	the	stumps	in	the	field

with	dynamite.”

“What	was	the	message	on	the	answering	machine?”

“There	was	no	message	on	the	answering	machine.”

Pearl	 exploded.	 “You	 lie!	 I	 came	 home,	 and	 I	 played	 it.	 No	 words	 appeared on	the	TTY,	so	I	put	my	hand	on	the	speaker	and	felt	a	voice.	I	felt	it!	I	demand to	know	your	message!”

“It	said,	‘ This	is	a	recording.	Please	hang	up	your	set.	If	you	need	assistance, dial	your	operator.	Please	hang	up	now. ’	Why?	Don’t	you	trust	me?”

I	 was	 always	 looking	 for	 gifts	 for	 Pearl,	 so	 when	 I	 was	 flipping	 through	 the Paladin	Press	catalog	that	came	with	 Get	Even,	I	read	an	advertisement	for	 Slash and	 Thrust,	 a	 book.	 The	 catalog	 recommended	 it	 for	 self-defense	 for	 women.

Pearl	had	a	dog,	a	gun,	and	an	autodialer,	but	these	only	protected	her	when	she

was	at	home,	and	her	past	assaults	had	all	taken	place	away	from	home.	If	she

felt	 feel	 less	 vulnerable,	 then	 she	 might	 feel	 less	 paranoid.	 I	 ordered	 it,	 along with	a	survivalist	book	Jeff	had	suggested,	a	book	on	how	to	make	a	silencer	as

Ralph	had	suggested,	and	a	first-aid	book.

Pearl	 bought	 a	 children’s	 ice-cream	 maker	 shaped	 like	 a	 penguin. Age	 three and	up,	 it	 said	 on	 the	 box.	 I	 was	 astonished	 when	 Pearl	 told	 me	 it	 was	 for	 our children.	I	smiled	and	said	nothing.

A	few	weeks	later,	I	discovered	Pearl	had	changed	her	dentist.	I	showed	her

the	charge	on	our	credit	card	bill	and	said	that	if	she	had	found	a	better	dentist than	the	one	we	were	both	using,	she	should	tell	me	so	I	could	change	to	the	best one,	too.

“I	have	the	right	to	have	my	own	dentist,”	was	all	she	said.

I	wondered	if	Pearl	was	planning	to	leave	and	hide,	as	she	had	done	before,

and	she	didn’t	want	to	share	suppliers	lest	they	leak	her	whereabouts	to	me.

Summer	faded	into	autumn.	I	hired	a	helper	to	help	me	slaughter	our	three	pigs.

Then	Pearl	and	I	butchered	200	kilograms	of	pork.	After	sixteen	hours	of	cutting

and	 wrapping,	 our	 freezer	 was	 full	 and	 our	 arms	 and	 backs	 were	 sore.	 For	 the rest	of	the	week,	we	made	bacon	and	sausages.

Alan	took	the	lambs	to	be	slaughtered	and	butchered.	Pearl	spread	rye	seed	in

the	 fields	 while	 I	 stacked	 ten	 tons	 of	 hay	 delivered	 by	 semi-trailer	 into	 the hayloft.	Working	on	our	property	minimized	the	growing	tension	between	us,	for

every	conversation	seemed	to	end	in	a	quarrel.	Our	sex	life	was	fading	away.	I

knew	something	was	going	to	happen	but	didn’t	know	what	to	expect.	We	lived

from	day	to	day.

Pearl	 and	 I	 met	 Ralph	 and	 Adele	 at	 the	 four-wheel-drive	 garage	 and	 test-

drove	 army	 jeeps.	 All	 had	 open	 sides,	 canvas	 tops,	 and	 camouflage	 paint.	 We bought	one.	I	drove	it	home,	laying	a	trail	of	blue	smoke,	and	Pearl	followed	me

in	our	truck.

I	was	astounded	when	Pearl	refused	to	drive	it.

“A	jeep	is	not	for	a	woman.”

“Why	didn’t	you	say	you	would	never	drive	it	 before	we	bought	it?”

“I	will	drive	the	truck	while	you	drive	the	jeep.”

“I	need	the	truck	to	go	to	classes.	I	can’t	drive	a	jeep	in	my	suit.”

“I	 will	 hitchhike	 when	 you	 go	 to	 class,	 the	 same	 as	 now.	 This	 is	 your	 last MBA	year.”

The	way	Pearl	wanted	us	to	buy	a	second	vehicle	with	no	intention	to	drive	it

herself	reinforced	my	concern	that	she	was	planning	to	leave—with	the	truck.

“Then	 we	 should	 not	 have	 bought	 the	 jeep.	 I	 think	 we	 should	 have	 the marriage	counseling	you	suggested.”

“It	won’t	help.	You	have	to	be	honest.	You	were	not	like	this	before.”

“You	wanted	marriage	counseling,	but	now	you	say	no.	Why?”

“We	can	only	go	after	you	are	honest	with	yourself.	I	am	watching	you.”

We	drove	our	jeep	to	my	parents’	house	on	a	cold	afternoon.	Its	heater	warmed

only	 our	 feet,	 and	 we	 were	 shivering	 by	 the	 time	 we	 arrived.	 Father	 offered	 to lend	us	his	spare	car	for	the	winter,	a	rusty,	twenty-year-old	Oldsmobile.	We	now had	a	pickup,	a	jeep,	and	a	two-ton	tank.	Pearl	drove	it	home	behind	me.

Alan	sold	Yarby.	With	only	four	sheep,	three	horses,	two	goats,	and	a	cat	in

the	barn,	and	all	the	pigs,	lambs,	kids,	and	ducks	in	our	freezer,	our	farm	chores eased	for	the	winter.

I	 was	 astonished	 again	 when,	 on	 Halloween,	 Pearl	 brought	 a	 pumpkin	 and candies	home.	“You	empty	the	pumpkin.	I	will	carve	the	face.	We	will	put	it	by

the	 driveway	 next	 to	 the	 road.	 Children	 will	 ask	 for	 our	 candies	 if	 we	 have	 a good	pumpkin.”

“No	kids	came	for	trick-or-treat	in	the	past	two	years.	The	driveway	is	steep

and	dark	with	 Beware	of	Dog	and	 No	Trespassing	signs.”

Pearl	 carved	 a	 Jack-o’-Lantern	 and	 put	 a	 candle	 in	 it.	 I	 carried	 it	 down	 the driveway	and	put	it	next	to	the	road.	It	looked	wonderful,	but	no	children	paid	us a	visit.	Pearl	ate	the	candies.

While	 doing	 morning	 chores,	 I	 heard	 the	 Oldsmobile	 rumble	 into	 life	 as	 Pearl left	to	go	to	work.	An	hour	later,	I	drove	the	truck	to	the	cove,	expecting	to	park it	by	the	Oldsmobile,	but	I	didn’t	see	the	car.

That	evening,	during	dinner,	Pearl	signed	impassively,	“The	car	broke	down

this	 morning	 near	 our	 driveway.	 I	 hitchhiked	 to	 the	 cove	 and	 asked	 the	 gas station	to	tow	it	there.	They	fixed	it.	I	am	telling	you	so	you	are	not	upset	by	the credit	card	bill.”

“What	was	wrong	with	it?”

“The	battery	wires	touched	together.”

“A	waste	of	money!	I	could	have	fixed	it.	Why	didn’t	you	walk	back	and	get

me?”

Pearl	stared	through	me.	“It	was	dark.”

“It’s	always	dark.	That’s	why	we	have	flashlights!”

On	 the	 weekend,	 I	 drove	 to	 the	 gas	 station	 in	 Snug	 Cove.	 “Don,	 on

Wednesday,	 Pearl	 had	 the	 Oldsmobile	 towed	 here	 and	 repaired.	 What

happened?”

“Your	battery	cage	rusted,	so	the	battery	tipped	and	shorted.	I	welded	a	new

cage	 and	 charged	 her	 seventy-five	 bucks.	 That’s	 what	 I	 reported	 to	 Laurent.

Pearl	didn’t	have	enough	money,	so	she	charged	it.”

“What	did	the	police	have	to	do	with	this?”

“Laurent	asked	me	to	do	a	safety	check.”	Don	lowered	his	voice.	“He	asked

me	not	to	tell	you,	but	you	need	to	know:	Laurent	wanted	your	car	checked	for

sabotage.”

“Sabotage!	What	did	you	say?”

“No	sabotage,	but	only	God	knows	what	rusty	part	will	fall	out	next.”

I	saw	Laurent’s	jeep	near	the	store	and	parked	beside	it.	He	asked	me	to	get

in.	 “Derrick,	 Pearl’s	 car	 broke	 down.	 She	 saw	 sparks	 under	 the	 hood,	 the headlights	 went	 out,	 and	 the	 engine	 stopped.	 A	 commuter	 saw	 her	 waving	 a flashlight.	He	stopped	to	give	her	a	lift	and	then	saw	the	car	blocking	the	road.

With	help	from	another	car,	they	pushed	it	out	of	the	way.	He	gave	her	a	lift	to

the	 first	 ferry	 but,	 instead	 of	 walking	 to	 it,	 she	 came	 to	 me	 to	 report	 the breakdown	and	asked	me	to	have	it	towed.	Then	she	went	to	work	on	the	second

ferry.”

“I	was	on	the	second	ferry!	She	must	have	been	hiding.”

“She	asked	me	not	to	tell	you,	but	you	need	to	know:	Pearl	wanted	your	car

checked	for	sabotage.”

Pearl	put	our	mail	on	the	table,	opened.	There	were	the	paperbacks	I	had	ordered

—postmarked	a	month	ago.

“You	didn’t	tell	me	you	ordered	these	books.”

“You	spoiled	my	gift. Slash	and	Thrust	was	for	you,	for	Christmas.	It	teaches you	how	to	protect	yourself	with	your	pocketknife	if	a	man	assaults	you. Home Workshop	 Silencers	 is	 for	 shooting	 deer	 by	 the	 barn;	 I	 told	 you	 about	 Ralph’s

idea.	Jeff	mentioned	 Life	After	Doomsday,	and	it	looked	interesting.	The	 Medical Handbook	is	first-aid.”

Except	for	the	 Medical	Handbook,	they	turned	out	to	be	mail-order	swindles like	 Get	Even.

I	drove	the	truck	to	work	so	we	could	buy	groceries	and	grain	on	our	way	home.

Although	 her	 behavior	 was	 increasingly	 odd,	 I	 continued	 to	 speak	 to	 her normally,	as	if	speaking	normally	would	guide	her	to	thinking	normally.

“Shall	 we	 eat	 dinner	 in	 Horseshoe	 Bay	 tonight?”	 I	 signed.	 “It’s	 so	 cold	 that the	ice	cream	won’t	melt	in	the	truck.”

“We	can	eat	out	if	you	want.”

We	ate	in	the	upscale	Bay	Moorings	restaurant,	at	a	table	with	a	view	of	the

marina.	I	ordered	margaritas.

“How	did	you	know	about	this	place?”

“Leo	 and	 I	 used	 to	 eat	 here	 for	 half	 price	 when	 we	 were	 on	 patrol.	 Is something	bothering	you?”

“Your	ASL	does	not	improve.	Your	eyes	wander.	When	you	look	away,	I	look

there	too,	thinking	something	is	happening	over	there.	You	never	ask	me,	‘How

was	 your	 day?’	 You	 don’t	 take	 the	 time	 to	 explain	 to	 me	 why	 you	 are	 doing things.	You	expect	me	to	follow	you.”

“I	am	avoiding	arguments.	We	need	to	sign	like	we	did	before	we	got	busy.”

“I	often	wonder	what	you	are	thinking.”

“I	will	try	to	communicate	more,	but	we	have	to	love	each	other	as	we	are.”

“Why	didn’t	you	choose	a	hearie	wife	who	can	communicate	with	you	in	big

words?	It	makes	me	suspect	why	you	chose	a	deafie	wife.”

“Because	I	love	you,	not	big	words.”

Pearl	watched	a	ferry	disappear	around	the	point.	She	was	still	gazing	at	the

ripples	of	water	when	the	meal	arrived.

“Is	something	bothering	you?”	I	said	again.

The	 question	 hung	 in	 the	 air,	 and	 we	 ate	 without	 signing.	 When	 our	 ferry rounded	the	point,	she	signed.	“Let’s	go.	We	must	unload	the	truck	and	put	wood

on	the	fire.”

On	 the	 way	 home,	 I	 paused	 at	 the	 Oldsmobile	 parked	 in	 the	 cove	 so	 Pearl could	 drive	 it	 home.	 I	 drove	 the	 truck	 home,	 changed,	 did	 the	 chores,	 and unloaded	the	sacks	of	grain	in	the	barn.	It	was	just	above	freezing.

When	I	walked	back	to	the	house,	Pearl	wasn’t	home,	so	no	fire	was	burning,

and	the	house	was	cold.	I	worried	that	the	Oldsmobile	had	broken	down	again,

so	I	drove	to	the	cove.	The	car	was	gone.	I	drove	home	slowly,	looking	for	it	at

the	sides	of	the	roads.	There	were	no	streetlights	on	Bowen	Island.

Suddenly,	the	flashing	blue	lights	of	the	RCMP	jeep	came	up	behind	me,	and it	 rocketed	 past.	 I	 wondered	 where	 Laurent	 was	 going	 so	 quickly	 on	 a	 Friday night.	I	drove	slowly,	looking	for	Pearl,	on	my	way	home	to	call	the	police.

As	I	crested	the	driveway,	the	headlights	came	down	on	Laurent’s	jeep.

Pearl	stood	in	the	kitchen,	Laurent	at	his	side.	She	looked	wild	and	dangerous.

“Laurent,	what’s	up?”	I	said	without	signing.

“Interpret!”	demanded	Pearl.

“Laurent.	What’s	happening?”	I	signed	and	said.

“Your	lips	said	something	different!	Interpret	exactly!”

“Laurent.	What	is	up?”	I	signed	exactly,	pointing	up.

“Pearl	asked	me	to	arrest	you	for	trying	to	kill	her.”

My	head	started	spinning.	“Why?”	was	all	I	could	say.

“Interpret!”	signed	Pearl.	I	was	the	interpreter	at	my	own	inquisition.

“Are	you	trying	to	kill	Pearl?”	said	Laurent.

“Don’t	be	ridiculous,”	I	signed	and	said.

“She	is	convinced	you	are.”

“Arrest	him!”

“Pearl,	I	need	reasonable	and	probable	grounds	to	believe	Derrick	threatened

you.	When	did	he	try	to	kill	you?”

“Many	times!”	she	screamed	silently	through	wild	signs.	“The	first	time	was

firewood.	He	rolled	the	wood	down	the	hill	to	the	truck.	Firewood	rolled	into	me

and	hurt	me	and	bruised	me.”

“I	wasn’t	aiming	at	her.	It	was	easier	to	roll	the	wood	than	to	carry	it.”

“Rolling	firewood	isn’t	going	to	kill	anyone,”	said	Laurent.

“Derrick	made	me	fall	off	the	roof!”

“Did	he	push	you	off	the	roof?”

“No,	he	is	too	clever.	Derrick	made	the	ladder	break!”

I	told	the	story	of	the	ladder	collapse	two	years	ago.	“That’s	the	ladder,	over

there.	Look	for	yourself.	After	it	buckled,	I	reinforced	it	with	wood,	and	we	have been	using	it	ever	since.”

“Derrick	was	on	the	roof	when	it	broke,	so	it	wasn’t	deliberate.	If	he	wanted

to	kill	you,	he	would	have	shoved	you	off	and	climbed	down	the	ladder.”

Pearl	 shook	 her	 head	 violently.	 “No!	 No!	 No!	 He	 tried	 to	 kill	 me	 with electricity!	He	told	me	to	hold	wires	when	the	power	was	on!”

“Is	that	so?”

“Insulated	 wires.	 The	 kitchen	 lights	 are	 on	 the	 same	 circuit,	 and	 we	 were working	 at	 night,	 so	 I	 needed	 to	 leave	 that	 circuit	 on.	 Pearl	 was	 in	 the	 attic	 on dry	wood.	She	was	perfectly	safe.”

“And	the	car?	You	know	about	that!”	She	was	hysterical.

“It’s	falling	apart.	Did	you	tell	Derrick	about	your	concerns?”

“No!	I	didn’t	want	him	to	find	out	that	I	discovered	his	plan!”

“Pearl, why	do	you	think	Derrick	is	trying	to	kill	you?”

“I	don’t	know!	Look	at	these!”

She	went	to	the	bookshelf	and	brought	back	 Get	Even, Slash	and	Thrust, The Blaster’s	Handbook, Life	After	Doomsday,	and	 Home	Workshop	Silencers.

“What	are	you	going	to	do	with	a	silencer?”

“Shoot	animals.”

“Are	you	sure	it	wasn’t	for	Frank?”

“Get	Even	was	for	Frank. Slash	and	Thrust	was	supposed	to	be	a	Christmas gift,	for	her	self-defense,	but	she	opened	my	mail.”

“Now	I	understand	why	his	first	wife	left	him.	She	was	afraid!”

“Afraid	of	 what?”

“You	know!”

Laurent	rubbed	his	hands.	“You’d	better	get	some	firewood	burning.”

Laurent	 and	 Pearl	 were	 scribbling	 notes	 when	 I	 returned	 from	 stoking	 the stove.

“Pearl	says	you	and	Ralph	talked	about	killing.”

“You	 never	 talked	 to	 Dibs,	 so	 you	 didn’t	 know	 he	 is	 hard-of-hearing.	 He listened	to	you	when	he	was	getting	beer.	Everyone	was	shocked	when	he	told	us

about	your	idea	to	show	death	on	TV.	I	was	so	embarrassed!”

“Ralph	wanted	to	make	the	world	 less	violent	because	if	people	knew	about death,	 they	 wouldn’t	 want	 to	 kill.	 Why	 didn’t	 you	 say	 so	 when	 we	 talked	 with them	the	next	day?”

“Ralph	carries	a	gun	in	his	jeep!	Derrick	told	me.”

“His	gun	is	legal.	I	approved	his	permits.”

Pearl	showed	Laurent	my	Pocket	Day-Timer.	“It’s	in	code!”

“I	abbreviate.	Do	I	need	to	write	everything	in	full?”

“Hundreds	of	dollars	come	into	our	bank	account,	but	where	does	the	money

come	from?”

“From	my	expense	claims.	You	can	see	the	same	money	going	 out	one	month

before,	in	the	credit	card	bill.”

“I	 caught	 him	 listening	 to	 messages	 on	 the	 answering	 machine	 and	 then

erasing	them.”

“Messages	like	 This	is	a	recording.”

“Derrick	doesn’t	wear	a	ring.	He	rides	with	Leo,	and	he	goes	to	the	YMCA.	I

think	 he’s	 gay.	 His	 glasses	 make	 him	 look	 like	 a	 drug	 dealer.	 His	 friends	 are weird.	Ralph,	Leo,	Virgil,	Stanley,	Rokus,	all	weird!”

“All	weird,	except	 Pearl.”

“Derrick	is	a	capable	man.	If	he	wanted	to	kill	you,	you’d	be	dead	by	now.	I

can’t	arrest	him;	all	I	have	from	you	is	innuendo.”

“What	is	‘innuendo?’”

I	had	had	enough.	“Look	it	up	in	the	dictionary.”	I	crossed	my	arms.

Laurent	 looked	 at	 his	 watch.	 “The	 water	 taxi	 leaves	 in	 thirty	 minutes.	 I’ll drive	you	to	the	dock.	Can	you	stay	with	friends	in	town?”

Pearl	nodded.	She	ran	around	the	house,	tossing	items	into	her	backpack.

As	she	turned	to	leave	with	Laurent,	I	signed	and	said,	“Get	help—you	need

it.”

“Nothing	is	wrong	with	me!”	Pearl	burst	into	tears.

They	 drove	 away,	 into	 the	 night.	 I	 stood	 in	 shock.	 Pearl	 ran	 away	 on	 4

December	1987,	twenty	days	before	our	second	anniversary.





Where	Are	the	Bullets?

I	tried	to	call	Jodi,	who	lived	with	Gavin,	but	his	number	was	unlisted.	I	called Jeff,	 told	 him	 what	 had	 just	 happened,	 and	 asked	 for	 Gavin’s	 number.	 Jeff refused	 to	 release	 it	 and	 seemed	 to	 give	 up	 on	 her;	 his	 last	 words	 to	 me	 were,

“It’s	time	for	me	to	hang	up	my	Pearl	connection.”

I	 remembered	 Fanny,	 an	 interpreter	 friend	 of	 Pearl’s	 whom	 I	 had	 met	 four years	ago	but	hadn’t	seen	since.	I	found	her	number	in	the	phone	book	and	called

her.

“Pearl	is	paranoid.	I	am	one	of	the	few	hearies	she	sometimes	trusts.	I	hadn’t

seen	her	for	a	year,	but	when	your	new	books	arrived,	she	came	to	show	them	to

me.	She	was	in	shock!	She	thought	you	planned	to	kill	her,	and	your	books	were

your	research.”

“Slash	and	Thrust	was	to	be	her	Christmas	gift.”

“If	you	had	told	her	beforehand,	those	books	might	not	have	been	a	problem,

but	in	her	mind, surprise	equals	 secret	equals	 danger.	When	she	lived	here,	she accused	me	of	stealing	her	tax	refund.	When	her	check	arrived	in	the	mail,	she

said	she	trusted	me	again—but	did	she?	She	might	have	thought	I	waited	to	see

if	 she	 would	 notice	 it	 before	 I	 cashed	 it	 myself.	 That’s	 the	 way	 Pearl’s	 mind works.	Earning	her	trust	might	take	more	time	than	you	have	left	with	her.”

“Can	you	see	her?	If	anyone	can	help,	it’s	you.”

“There	 is	 nothing	 I	 can	 do	 until	 she	 calls	 me.	 If	 I	 call	 her,	 she’ll	 know	 you called	me,	and	that	will	be	the	end	of	her	trust.”

I	called	Eugénie	and	told	her	what	happened.

“Well,	I’ll	be	damned.”	Eugénie	had	a	way	with	words.

“Pearl	liked	you.	Could	you	have	a	heart-to-heart	talk	with	her?	I	think	she’ll

be	 at	 Jodi’s	 tonight,	 around	 the	 corner	 from	 you.	 You’ll	 remember	 her	 from Wreck	Beach.”	I	gave	her	the	address.	“Tell	Pearl,	or	Jodi	if	she	isn’t	there,	why you	left	me.	Please	do	it	for	her.”

“All	right,	but	she	might	not	recognize	me	in	clothes.”

I	called	Father.	“Let	us	know	if	there	is	any	way	to	help.	And	thank	God	she

isn’t	pregnant.”

Eugénie	called	back.	“I	saw	Pearl	at	Jodi’s.”

“Thank	you!	What	did	she	say?”

“She	was	wound	up	as	tight	as	a	drum.	At	first,	Jodi	didn’t	want	to	let	me	in,

but	 I	 talked	 her	 into	 it.	 Pearl	 wasn’t	 interested	 in	 discussing	 anything.	 I	 think

your	 ability	 to	 influence	 her	 life	 even	 after	 she	 walked	 out,	 like	 sending	 me there,	distressed	her.	I	told	her	that	my	leaving	you	had	nothing	to	do	with	you

and	everything	to	do	with	me.	Pearl	said	only	that	she	doesn’t	want	to	see	you

again.”

“I	see.	I’m	not	going	to	tell	anyone	what	happened.	Otherwise,	if	she	returns,

it	will	make	recovery	harder.”

“I	thanked	her	for	signing	for	our	divorce.	Lunch	on	Monday?”

That	 weekend,	 I	 kept	 myself	 busy,	 with	 tools	 in	 my	 hands	 and	 Whisky	 at	 my side.	 I	 hoped	 that	 Pearl	 would	 discuss	 her	 feelings	 with	 her	 family.	 I	 knew	 I would	be	taking	a	risk	if	Pearl	returned	without	accepting	that	she	had	a	problem and	 agreeing	 to	 therapy—it	 was	 only	 a	 matter	 of	 time	 before	 she	 had	 more delusions	and	disappeared	or	became	dangerous;	she	had	spoken	about	revenge

as	if	it	were	justified	whenever	hearies	wronged	deafies.	Nevertheless,	I	resolved to	take	her	back	unconditionally.

I	was	still	so	stunned	by	her	accusations	that	I	couldn’t	feel	how	much	Pearl

must	 have	 been	 suffering	 in	 order	 to	 develop,	 live	 with,	 and	 act	 on	 her	 bizarre thoughts.	Why	had	Pearl’s	friends	been	neutral?	Did	they	believe	her	stories?	I

thought	of	calling	her	mother,	but	I	worried	that	if	I	did,	Pearl	would	never	trust me	again.

On	Monday,	at	work,	I	could	hardly	function.	I	called	our	doctor,	who	gave

me	an	immediate	appointment.

“I	think	the	world	of	Pearl,”	she	said.	“But	this	episode	doesn’t	surprise	me,

after	your	fertility	test	episode.	Try	calling	Dr.	Foreman,	a	signing	psychiatrist.	If Pearl	calls	me,	I’ll	help,	but	I	doubt	she	will	because	I’m	also	your	doctor	and

therefore	part	of	the	greater	conspiracy.”

I	 telephoned	 Dr.	 Foreman.	 “I	 can	 hear	 the	 lump	 in	 your	 throat	 through	 the telephone.	 I	 am	 booked	 for	 two	 months,	 but	 I	 will	 ask	 my	 colleague,	 Dr.

Sholokhov,	to	see	you.”

Sholokhov	 agreed	 to	 see	 me	 immediately.	 In	 his	 office,	 I	 told	 him	 what	 I knew	about	Pearl.

He	said,	“I	won’t	diagnose	Pearl	without	meeting	her,	but	it	sounds	like	she	is

responding	 abnormally	 to	 normal	 situations,	 and	 so	 she	 is	 struggling	 with	 a personality	 disorder.	 Dr.	 Forman’s	 research	 for	 Gallaudet	 has	 shown	 that	 deaf children	are	far	more	likely	than	others	to	develop	behavioral	problems,	and	one

in	four	has	moderate	to	severe	psychiatric	issues.	If	her	delusions	and	volatility are	 caused	 by	 past	 traumatic	 experiences,	 then	 therapy	 might	 help	 her	 to reconnect	with	reality	if	she	is	willing	to	try	it.	Does	she	chew	her	nails?”

“Yes!	I	have	 never	seen	her	with	full	fingernails.	We’ve	tried	Tabasco,	garlic,

manicures,	and	gloves.	Nothing	worked,”

“That’s	 a	 sign	 of	 anxiety.	 Most	 deaf	 people	 enjoy	 their	 lives	 as	 much	 as anyone,	but	those	who	are	anxious	are	more	likely	to	develop	paranoia	because

the	communication	gap	makes	it	hard	for	them	to	trust	hearing	people.	If	she	is

paranoid,	 she	 views	 your	 love	 as	 an	 attempt	 to	 exploit	 her.	 New	 experiences reinforce	old	beliefs.	However,	as	long	as	her	conscious	mind	was	focused	on	a

powerful	 goal,	 such	 as	 having	 a	 child,	 Pearl	 could	 suppress	 her	 subconscious.

Perhaps	the	question	is	not	why	Pearl	ran	away	but	why	she	was	able	to	give	you

three	years.”

“She	gave	her	last	two	partners	three	years,	too.”

“There	 is	 another	 possibility:	 schizophrenia.	 I	 don’t	 think	 she	 has

schizophrenia	because	she	is	able	to	work,	and	she	hasn’t	been	violent.	How	old

was	she	when	her	delusions	began?”

“In	her	teens,	Pearl	starting	thinking	her	mother	killed	her	father.	That’s	all	I know.	Her	family	hasn’t	said	anything	about	her	history.”

“I’m	sorry	to	say,	but	family	silence	is	a	schizophrenia	indicator.”

“What	is	schizophrenia?”

“It’s	 a	 brain	 disease	 characterized	 by	 a	 distorted	 perception	 of	 reality	 that leads	to	life-disrupting	behavioral	problems.	It	is	biochemical	with	an	inherited foundation,	but	it	also	takes	environmental	factors	to	launch	it.	Sufferers	usually develop	it	in	their	teens.	It	changes	their	personalities,	reduces	their	abilities,	and shortens	 their	 lifespans.	 Have	 any	 family	 members	 ever	 been	 diagnosed	 with	 a mental	illness?	Or	convicted?	Most	prisoners	have	at	least	one	mental	illness.”

“Not	on	her	mother’s	side,	but	I	know	nothing	about	her	father’s	side.”

“Congenital	 rubella—German	 measles—deafness,	 discrimination,	 loss	 of	 a

parent	in	childhood,	trauma,	and	family	dysfunction	are	environmental	factors.”

“Pearl	has	most	of	those.	Could	you	help	her	if	she	saw	you?”

“Not	 until	 she	 accepts	 she	 has	 a	 problem	 that	 is	 damaging	 her	 life.	 A	 good psychiatrist	with	willing	patients	can	make	a	significant	improvement	in	a	third, make	some	improvement	in	a	third,	and	make	no	improvement	in	the	other	third.

The	 patient’s	 willingness	 and	 trust	 are	 the	 keys,	 but	 paranoid	 people	 are hypersensitive	to	what	they	can’t	help	but	think	are	lies.	If	she	has	schizophrenia, we	have	drugs	that	should	stabilize	her	thinking,	but	they	have	side	effects	and

will	 have	 to	 be	 taken	 for	 the	 rest	 of	 her	 life.	 She	 is	 unlikely	 to	 take	 them voluntarily.	In	the	meantime,	I	suggest	you	take	care	of	yourself.”

Pearl’s	behavior	made	more	sense	to	me	now,	but	I	began	to	feel	less	hope	for

Pearl	and	our	relationship.	I	tried	to	help	make	things	right,	so	I	booked	a	series of	 appointments	 for	 us	 with	 Dr.	 Foreman	 starting	 in	 two	 months,	 his	 earliest available	slots.

At	lunchtime,	I	bought	a	dozen	red	roses	and	wrote	on	the	gift	card: Pearl,	I	love	you.

Please,	get	help.

You	need	it.

Love,	Derrick.

I	cared	enough	for	Pearl	to	say	what	had	to	be	said,	and	no	one	else	seemed	to

say.	I	drove	to	Jodi’s.	She	opened	the	door,	magnificently	pregnant.

“Congratulations!	Is	Pearl	here?”

“Pearl	is	not	here,”	said	Jodi.

“I	need	to	see	her.	Please	give	her	these	flowers.”

Jodi	smiled.	“Pearl	doesn’t	want	to	see	you.”

“Tell	Pearl	I	love	her.”	I	handed	the	bouquet	to	Jodi	and	left.

That	weekend,	I	drove	the	jeep	to	my	parents’	home.

Over	 dinner,	 my	 mother	 said,	 “I	 wanted	 to	 help,	 so	 I	 called	 Pearl’s	 mother today.	 I’d	 never	 called	 her	 before.	 She	 would	 only	 say	 Pearl’s	 first	 marriage ended	the	same	way.	It	was	the	shortest	call	I	ever	had.”

I	 was	 stunned—none	 of	 Pearl’s	 family	 members	 had	 warned	 me	 about	 her

past	behavior.	I	accepted	they	didn’t	want	to	cut	off	any	opportunity	for	her,	but their	failure	to	advise	me	only	made	life	worse	for	everyone,	including	Pearl.

Two	weeks	after	Pearl	left,	on	Friday	night,	I	received	a	TTY	call:

DERRICK	HERE	GA

PEARL	HERE	HA	GA

I	LOVE	YOU	GA

PLEASE	COME	AND	GET	ME	GA

YES	WHERE	ARE	YOU	GA

AT	MOTHERS	HOUSE	I	MUST	LEAVE	TONIGHT	PICK	ME	UP	GA

THE	LAST	FERRY	IS	ALREADY	GONE	I	WILL	ASK	MY	FATHER	TO	PICK	YOU	UP	YOU	CAN

SLEEP	WITH	THEM	OVERNIGHT	AND	THEN	COME	HOME	TOMORROW	GA

OK	I	WILL	WAIT	FOR	YOUR	FATHER	GA

WONDERFUL	I	LOVE	YOU

SK

I	was	overjoyed!	I	called	Father.	He	was	happy	to	collect	Pearl.	After	two	hours, my	mother	called.

“Pearl’s	here!	Your	father	drove	so	fast,	he	was	stopped	for	speeding.	He	told

the	cop	he	was	rushing	to	help	a	mentally-ill	woman,	so	he	let	your	father	off!”

“Did	he	speak	to	Pearl’s	mother?”

“No.	 Pearl	 was	 standing	 outside	 in	 a	 leather	 jacket	 on	 a	 winter’s	 night.	 She

was	still	shivering	when	she	arrived	here.	I	made	her	some	Ovaltine,	and	we	had a	 short	 conversation.	 ‘Why	 are	 you	 doing	 this?’	 I	 said.	 ‘I	 don’t	 feel	 safe,’	 she said.	 ‘Derrick	 loves	 you,’	 I	 said.	 I	 said	 you	 aren’t	 dangerous,	 but	 she	 didn’t believe	me.”

“If	she	thinks	I’m	dangerous,	then	why	did	she	call	me	tonight?”

“Because	 her	 mother	 threw	 her	 out!	 I	 said	 you’re	 like	 us;	 we	 can’t	 hurt anybody.	She	started	to	cry,	so	I	hugged	her.	I	lent	her	a	nightgown,	and	when

she	came	out	of	the	bathroom,	I	kissed	her	and	tucked	her	into	bed.	She	seemed

relaxed.”

“What	was	the	look	on	her	face?”

“Distant.”

In	the	morning,	Father	called	to	say	he	was	about	to	drive	Pearl	to	the	ferry

terminal,	 and	 she	 did	 not	 want	 me	 to	 pick	 her	 up	 when	 she	 arrived	 on	 Bowen Island.	I	tossed	all	the	Paladin	books	into	the	stove.

Two	hours	later,	Pearl	walked	in	the	door.	I	hugged	her,	but	she	felt	limp.	She

was	 wearing	 a	 new,	 expensive	 sheepskin	 bomber	 jacket.	 Despite	 her	 haggard face,	I	told	her	how	beautiful	she	looked.

“Gavin	told	me	to	leave.	Then	Mother	told	me	to	leave.	I	was	curious	if	you

would	help	me.”

Curious!	Her	words	hurt.	I	realized	that	she	had	come	home	because	she	had

nowhere	else	to	go,	and	it	was	free.

“Are	you	back	home	to	stay?”

“I	need	to	think	about	it.	It	is	my	turn	to	do	the	chores.”

My	 office	 Christmas	 party	 was	 the	 next	 day.	 Pearl	 came	 with	 me,	 but	 she ignored	me	except	when	she	needed	an	interpreter,	and	she	avoided	having	her

photo	taken.	Everyone	could	see	our	marriage	was	on	the	rocks,	even	though	I

had	told	no	one.

We	worked	on	the	house	with	renewed	vigor,	especially	Pearl.

I	 did	 my	 best	 to	 calm	 her	 and	 show	 my	 love.	 I	 sat	 next	 to	 her	 while	 she watched	television.	I	held	her	hand	while	walking.	I	took	her	on	a	Bowen	Nature

Club	cruise	to	see	the	seals,	puffins,	and	whales.	But	her	behavior	had	changed.

She	 slept	 with	 her	 purse	 and	 kept	 it	 in	 view	 at	 all	 other	 times.	 She	 delayed depositing	her	paycheck	into	our	account	until	the	day	before	the	mortgage	was

due.	She	removed	the	telephone	bills	from	our	mailbox.

Pearl	mentioned	casually,	as	if	it	were	none	of	my	business,	that	she	had	an

appointment	 with	 “a	 counselor”	 that	 her	 friend	 had	 recommended.	 I	 needed	 to drive	 to	 Vancouver,	 so	 I	 offered	 to	 drop	 her	 off.	 She	 wouldn’t	 give	 me	 the address,	 only	 an	 intersection;	 then	 she	 stood	 on	 the	 corner	 until	 I	 drove	 out	 of

sight.

The	telephone	rang.	I	picked	it	up,	heard	a	TTY,	and	signed	that	the	call	was	for her.	 I	 put	 the	 handset	 on	 the	 kitchen	 counter	 because	 she	 had	 to	 pick	 up	 the second	 phone	 before	 I	 hung	 up	 the	 first	 phone,	 or	 else	 the	 connection	 would drop.	Pearl	walked	to	the	visitors’	room	to	use	the	TTY,	and,	for	the	first	time, she	closed	the	door.	Her	purse	lay	on	the	counter.	I	had	only	to	glance	in	it	to	see a	 card	 for	 a	 Resource	 Centre	 for	 Abused	 Women	 along	 with	 the	 missing

telephone	bills.

When	Pearl	came	back	after	her	call,	she	saw	me	sitting	at	the	kitchen	table

and	looked	at	the	counter.

“Why	didn’t	you	hang	up	the	telephone?”

“I	forgot.	Please	hang	it	up	now.”

“You	were	listening	to	my	conversation!”

“No	one	can	understand	TTY	tones.	You	need	a	machine.”

“I	know	you	listened	to	me!	How	much	did	you	understand?”

“Call	 your	 interpreter	 friends.	 Ask	 if	 they	 can	 understand	 TTY	 tones.	 Do	 it now!”

Pearl	 took	 her	 purse	 to	 the	 visitors’	 room	 and	 returned	 a	 few	 minutes	 later, now	 calm.	 “I	 called	 the	 Message	 Relay	 Centre.	 They	 said	 normal	 people	 can’t understand	TTY	tones.	But	you	are	not	normal.”

The	telephone	rang	again.	“May	I	speak	to	Pearl?”

“No,	you	can’t.	She’s	deaf.”

“I’m	 so	sorry.	I’m	calling	about	the	house	for	rent.”

“A	woman	is	calling	about	a	house	for	rent.”

“I’m	not	interested,”	signed	Pearl.

“She’s	not	interested.”	I	hung	up.	“What	was	that	call	about?”

“That	is	my	business.”	Pearl	crossed	her	arms.

Pearl	 surprised	 me	 with	 a	 visit	 to	 my	 office.	 She	 didn’t	 come	 to	 my	 desk,	 as usual,	but	stood	at	our	reception	counter.

“Why	did	the	bank	downstairs	refuse	to	talk	to	me	about	our	time	deposit?”

“Our	deposit	certificate	is	at	home.	What	do	you	want	to	know?”

“I	wanted	to	discuss	it	with	them,	but	it	is	in	your	name	only.”

“Of	course.	Otherwise,	you	would	need	to	come	to	the	bank	to	sign	a	new	one

every	time	the	old	one	matured.	We’re	married,	so	it	doesn’t	matter	whose	name

is	on	anything.”

“You	must	prove	it.	Come	to	the	bank	with	me	now!”

I	went	to	the	bank	with	Pearl	to	satisfy	her	that	our	deposit,	worth	less	than

her	ring,	was	there.	It	was	obvious	she	was	preparing	to	separate.

On	 her	 thirty-fourth	 birthday,	 I	 took	 Pearl	 to	 the	 sushi	 restaurant	 near	 my condo,	where	we	had	eaten	when	our	adventure	began.

She	rubbed	her	hands	together.

“It	is	so	cold	outside,	the	streetlights	have	halos	like	angels.”

“This	restaurant	reminds	me	of	past	happiness.	Remember	when	we	ate	here,

motorcycled,	scuba	dived,	and	made	love	on	the	carpet?”

“Everything	is	different	now.”

“I	don’t	understand	why	everything	is	different.”

“Yesterday,	 I	 was	 shocked	 when	 I	 discovered	 everyone	 in	 your	 office	 knew we	had	a	marriage	problem.	Everyone	was	staring	at	me	to	see	which	hand	I	was

wearing	my	wedding	ring	on.”

“I	told	my	boss,	but	no	one	else.	I’m	sorry	I	didn’t	buy	you	a	birthday	gift,

but	you	didn’t	deposit	your	paycheck,	and	you	bought	$2,000	worth	of	clothes.”

Most	 of	 the	 expense	 was	 one	 purchase	 at	 a	 leather	 boutique	 five	 days	 after she	ran	away,	probably	for	the	jacket	she	was	wearing.

“I	 accept	 the	 clothes	 I	 bought	 for	 myself	 as	 your	 gift.	 You	 can	 buy	 me matching	shoes	and	chocolates.”

After	 dinner,	 we	 drove	 to	 Robson	 Street,	 but	 we	 had	 to	 park	 far	 from	 the shopping	 area.	 We	 walked	 back	 in	 the	 icy	 air,	 holding	 gloved	 hands	 as	 we wandered	from	shop	to	shop,	gazing	at	luxury	goods	we	couldn’t	afford.

I	bought	Pearl	a	box	of	chocolates,	and	she	took	me	to	the	boutique	where	she

had	bought	the	jacket.	She	chose	a	matching	pair	of	shoes.	I	paid	with	our	credit card	and	told	Pearl	to	wait	while	I	fetched	the	truck	because	it	was	far	away,	it was	freezing,	and	we	had	a	ferry	to	catch.	When	I	drove	back	to	the	shop,	Pearl

climbed	in	and	slammed	the	door.

“You	are	clever.	Fuck— Fuck—FUCK! ”	She	was	livid.

I	 couldn’t	 understand	 what	 I	 had	 done	 wrong.	 Everything	 I	 did	 caused

conflict.

“I’m	trying	to	be	nice.	I	wanted	you	to	be	warm.”

“You	can’t	fool	me.	You	set	this	up	to	search	my	purse!”

“You	always	have	your	purse	with	you.”

“I	left	it	under	the	seat	so	I	could	walk	with	my	hands	in	my	pockets	to	keep

them	warm.”

“That’s	 a	 stupid	 place	 to	 leave	 a	 purse!	 Your	 car	 was	 broken	 into	 before.

You’re	not	thinking	straight.”

Pearl	turned	away	from	me	and	crossed	her	arms.

“Do	you	want	to	go	to	the	Bowen	Island	New	Year’s	Eve	party?	Let’s	try	to	be

happy	on	New	Year’s	Eve.”

“I	already	bought	tickets	for	Jodi	and	me.”

I	was	stunned.	“You	bought	tickets	without	your	husbands,	and	you	didn’t	tell

me?”

“Gavin’s	busy.	And	you	won’t	understand	us	when	we	sign	fast.”

“I	want	to	be	together	on	New	Year’s	Eve.	I’ll	buy	tickets	and	invite	my	sister

Lydia	and	her	husband,	Shawn.	They	can	stay	overnight.”

“I	don’t	care	what	you	do.”

“Can	we	dance?”

“We	can	decide	later.”

On	New	Year’s	Eve,	Pearl	picked	Jodi	up	from	the	ferry	and	drove	directly	to

the	 party.	 I	 picked	 Lydia	 and	 Shawn	 up	 from	 the	 next	 ferry.	 The	 ferry,	 dusted white	by	snow,	sparkled	in	the	dock’s	floodlights.

By	 the	 time	 we	 arrived,	 there	 were	 no	 empty	 tables,	 so	 we	 sat	 down	 with Pearl	and	Jodi.	They	ignored	us	and	signed	in	high-speed	ASL	at	one	end	of	the

table	while	we	talked	at	the	other	end.

“This	is	how	Pearl	looked	the	night	Dad	rescued	her,”	shouted	Lydia	over	the

din.

“Be	careful	talking	when	you	face	that	way.	Jodi	lipreads.”

“Did	you	know	Mom	and	Dad	signed	up	for	a	sign	language	course?”

“That’s	wonderful!”

Lydia	leaned	her	head	on	her	hands	to	cover	her	mouth.	“Does	she	still	think

you	are	trying	to	kill	her?”

“I	don’t	know.	Ask	her	tomorrow,	woman-to-woman.	I’m	sure	she	won’t	talk

to	you	tonight.”

At	midnight,	to	the	song	“Auld	Lang	Syne,”	I	hugged	Pearl	and	Jodi,	but	they

pulled	away	and	danced	together.	Lydia,	Shawn,	and	I	left	first,	Pearl	and	Jodi	a few	 minutes	 later.	 We	 had	 to	 park	 at	 the	 bottom	 of	 the	 driveway	 and	 walk	 up through	the	snow	with	flashlights.	Lydia	and	Shawn	slept	in	the	visitors’	room.

Jodi	slept	on	the	sofa.

New	Year’s	Day	was	beautiful.	While	Pearl	and	Jodi	were	in	the	barn	doing

the	chores,	Lydia	and	Shawn	walked	into	the	kitchen.

“Shawn	 jammed	 a	 chair	 under	 the	 doorknob	 for	 security	 and	 stayed	 awake half	the	night,”	said	Lydia.

His	eyes	were	bloodshot.	“I	don’t	mind	meeting	the	reaper,	but	I	want	to	see

her	coming.”

Pearl	 and	 Jodi	 ignored	 us,	 so	 Lydia	 and	 Shawn	 left	 without	 ever	 talking	 to them.	 Pearl	 invited	 Jodi	 to	 stay	 another	 night	 and	 asked	 me	 to	 sleep	 in	 the visitors’	room	so	they	could	have	the	king-sized	bed.

At	bedtime,	while	they	watched	TV,	I	took	Jodi’s	coat	from	the	visitors’	room and	put	it	next	to	her.	Pearl	exploded.

“Look	how	he	controls	me!	You	are	my	witness!”

Jodi,	 like	 all	 Pearl’s	 friends,	 did	 nothing	 to	 help	 us	 as	 a	 couple.	 We	 had	 no network	of	common	friends,	so	we	had	none	to	help	us	through	tough	times	as	a

couple	but	plenty	to	help	us	survive	on	our	own.

The	telephone	rang	the	next	morning.	“Are	you	alone?”	said	Father.

“Jodi	and	Pearl	are	in	the	bedroom,”	I	whispered.

“Lydia	and	Shawn	filled	me	in.	Listen,	Pearl	could	shoot	you	with	your	gun

and	say	it	was	in	self-defense.	She’d	have	a	good	story	after	the	allegations	she’s made.	Your	mortgage	and	insurance	would	pay	out,	and	she’d	have	it	made.	Get

rid	of	your	guns!”

“I	 never	 thought	 of	 that.	 But	 if	 Pearl	 notices	 the	 guns	 have	 gone,	 she	 might think	I’ve	disarmed	her	as	the	next	step	in	my	evil	plan	and	try	killing	me	first.”

“Then	unload	them,	and	hide	your	ammunition.”

Snow	 fell	 upon	 snow.	 The	 weight	 of	 the	 snow	 pressed	 the	 boughs	 down	 like arches,	turning	the	driveway	into	a	tunnel	of	white.	I	put	chains	on	the	truck	tires and	 parked	 it	 at	 the	 bottom	 of	 the	 driveway	 next	 to	 the	 road.	 For	 two	 weeks, Pearl	 and	 I	 commuted,	 on	 our	 separate	 shifts,	 by	 walking	 up	 and	 down	 the driveway	 in	 the	 snow,	 with	 groceries	 in	 our	 backpacks	 and	 flashlights	 in	 our hands	or	teeth.

“I’m	going	to	the	store,”	Pearl	announced	one	evening.

She	dressed	warmly	and	walked	out	into	the	night,	down	the	driveway	to	the

truck.	An	hour	later,	she	returned	with	a	carton	of	milk.

“We	don’t	need	to	buy	cow	milk.	We	have	goat	milk.”

“I	wanted	to	rent	a	movie,	but	no	players	were	left.	I	saw	Arlette	in	the	store,

and	we	talked.”

“We	also	need	to	talk.	Would	you	like	a	margarita?”

Pearl	 nodded.	 I	 mixed	 the	 drinks.	 “Cheers.	 I	 think	 we	 have	 three	 choices.

One:	 we	 continue	 to	 live	 like	 we	 are	 living	 now.	 We	 share	 our	 house	 but	 live separate	lives.”

Pearl	shook	her	head.

“Two:	we	separate	and	divorce.”

“Do	you	want	a	divorce?”

“No.	Three:	You	see	a	doctor.	I	can	go	with	you	if	you	want.	You	can’t	live

with	suspicion	about	everyone.	You	will	never	be	happy.	You	will	never	have	a

family.”

Pearl	finished	her	drink	in	one	shot.	“I	want	children!”

“Then	you	must	see	a	doctor.”

Pearl	burst	into	tears.	“I’ll	kill	myself.”

“No!”	I	tried	to	hug	her,	but	she	sat	as	if	paralyzed.

“I	have	a	counselor.”

“Sometimes,	we	should	see	her	together.	May	I	call	her?”

Pearl	nodded	and	gave	me	a	card	from	her	purse.	The	address	was	far	from

where	she	had	asked	me	to	drop	her	off.

At	 bedtime,	 I	 walked	 downstairs	 to	 stoke	 the	 stove	 and	 saw	 Pearl	 poking pages	from	a	notepad	into	the	fire.	I	retreated	before	she	saw	me.

In	 the	 morning,	 I	 called	 the	 old	 counselor	 on	 the	 card	 Pearl	 gave	 me.	 She would	only	say	that	Pearl	was	no	longer	her	client.	I	thought	Pearl	had	much	to

gain	by	my	calling	the	new	counselor	at	the	Resource	Centre	for	Abused	Women

whose	name	I	had	seen	on	the	card	in	her	bag,	so	I	called	her,	too.

She	 was	 indignant	 I	 had	 called	 and	 became	 rude	 when	 I	 told	 her	 Pearl’s mental	 health	 was	 deteriorating	 and	 she	 needed	 care.	 When	 I	 said	 she	 didn’t need	 to	 take	 my	 word	 for	 it,	 but	 she	 did	 need	 to	 call	 Pearl’s	 mother	 and	 the RCMP,	she	hung	up	on	me.

If	 I	 told	 people	 that	 my	 wife	 had	 tried	 many	 times	 to	 kill	 me,	 they	 would think	I	was	mentally	ill,	and	if	they	cared	for	me	they	would	refer	me	to	a	doctor.

But	 when	 Pearl	 told	 people	 that	 her	 husband	 had	 tried	 many	 times	 to	 kill	 her, they	thought	she	was	sane—and	someone	had	referred	her	to	a	center	for	abused

women.	 In	 the	 1980s,	 there	 had	 been	 a	 backlash	 against	 abuse	 of	 women	 by men,	 so	 whenever	 a	 woman	 said	 she	 was	 being	 abused	 by	 a	 man,	 she	 was invariably	 believed—and	 if	 there	 was	 no	 physical	 abuse,	 then	 there	 must	 be psychological	 abuse.	 This	 was	 ideal	 for	 women	 who	 really	 were	 being	 abused and	 who	 needed	 emotional	 support	 and	 separation	 from	 their	 abusers,	 but	 it worked	 against	 Pearl,	 who	 was	 not	 abused	 but	 mentally	 unwell	 and	 needed diagnosis	 and	 treatment:	 because	 I	 was	 male,	 I	 was	 silenced,	 and	 Pearl’s delusions	were	reinforced.

Pearl	was	furious	I	had	called	her	counselor.	“I’m	shocked!	I	said	you	could

call	my	old	counselor!	My	new	counselor	is	private!”

“That	 means	 she	 can’t	 help	 you.	 You	 need	 a	 counselor	 who	 talks	 to	 your family.”

“How	did	you	find	out	about	my	new	counselor?”

“Your	calls	to	her	were	on	the	telephone	bill.”

“But	I	didn’t	bring	our	telephone	bill	home.”

“I	asked	the	telephone	company	for	copies,	to	pay	the	bills.”

I	 asked	 Pearl	 for	 the	 bus	 schedule.	 I	 saw	 S.	 Sgt.	 Zaharia	 written	 on	 it	 in

unfamiliar	handwriting.	“Who	is	this?”

Pearl	 looked	 embarrassed.	 “He	 is	 Laurent’s	 boss.	 Laurent	 refused	 to	 arrest you,	so	I	complained	to	his	boss.”

I	telephoned	Staff	Sergeant	Zaharia	from	my	office.

“I’m	 glad	 you	 called.	 Your	 wife	 keeps	 coming	 to	 our	 counter	 making

allegations	about	you,	Laurent,	the	RCMP,	and	the	West	Vancouver	Police.	She’s

been	in	here	four	times,	each	time	more	agitated.	Can	you	call	her	off?”

“What	allegations?	That	I’m	trying	to	kill	her?”

“That	was	the	first	time.	Now	she	says	you’re	running	drugs	from	Mexico	by

motorcycle,	 but	 we	 know	 you	 haven’t	 crossed	 the	 border	 in	 three	 years.

Something	is	wrong	with	her.	She	needs	help.”

“I	don’t	know	how	to	help.	She	pushes	back	everything	I	try.”

“When	we	suggested	she	see	a	psychiatrist,	she	became	hysterical	and	had	to

be	 escorted	 out	 the	 door	 by	 two	 constables.	 I	 see	 a	 pistol	 is	 registered	 to	 your address.	I	recommend	Laurent	store	it,	for	your	safety.”

I	 called	 Laurent.	 “I	 just	 spoke	 to	 Staff	 Sergeant	 Zaharia.	 He	 told	 me	 what Pearl’s	been	up	to.	Can	you	store	my	guns?”

“Sure.	You’d	be	surprised	how	often	I	store	guns	for	couples.”

“I’ll	bring	them	tomorrow	after	Pearl	gets	on	the	5:30	ferry.”

“I’ll	have	coffee.	Don’t	forget	to	wrap	them;	if	you	walk	in	here	with	a	gun	in

your	hand,	I’ll	have	to	shoot	you.”

That	night,	Pearl	elbowed	me	in	bed	because	she	wanted	to	talk.	“Where	are

the	bullets?”

I	stared	at	her,	dumbfounded.

“The	gun	has	no	bullets.	Why	did	you	remove	them?”

“For	our	safety.	How	did	you	know?”

“I	 tried	 to	 shoot	 a	 tree,	 but	 nothing	 happened.	 Why	 did	 you	 remove	 my protection?”

“We	have	too	many	arguments	now.	We	might	fight.”

Pearl	 nodded	 weirdly.	 I	 was	 terrified.	 I	 waited	 until	 I	 heard	 her	 sleeping before	I	allowed	myself	to	sleep.

I	called	Laurent	from	work	the	next	morning.

“Where	the	hell	were	you?	I	waited	an	hour,	so	I	was	late	going	on	patrol.”

“While	I	was	talking	to	you	yesterday,	Pearl	tried	to	test-fire	the	gun,	but	I’d

already	unloaded	it.	She’s	probably	more	paranoid	now.	The	tension	at	home	is

driving	me	nuts!”

“Derrick,	I	used	to	admire	you,	but	I	feel	sorry	for	you	now.”

I	called	Arlette.	“I’m	calling	to	ask	for	your	help	for	Pearl.	Can	we	talk?”

“What	 right	do	 you	have	to	call	 anyone	about	 Pearl?”	she	hissed.

“She’s	my	wife.	She	needs	to	see	a	doctor,	but	I	don’t	know	how	to	get	her	to

one.	Did	she	tell	you	about	the	RCMP?	Can	you	help?”

“What	 we	talk	about	is	between	 us! ”	Arlette	hung	up	on	me.

The	telephone	rang.	“Derrick,	this	is	Franco,	the	drywaller.	I	heard	you	were

selling	your	house.”

I	felt	like	I	was	being	gaslighted.	“We’re	not	selling	our	house!”

“That’s	not	what	I	heard,	but	if	you	change	your	mind,	call	me.”

The	atmosphere	at	home	was	explosive.	When	the	telephone	rang	a	few	days

later,	I	heard	TTY	tones	and	signed,	“For	you.”	Pearl	went	to	the	visitors’	room

and	closed	the	door.

After	 Franco’s	 unnerving	 call,	 I	 wanted	 to	 know	 if	 Pearl	 was	 selling	 our house,	so	I	put	an	office	Dictaphone	next	to	the	kitchen	telephone	and	recorded

the	tones.

When	 Pearl	 came	 out,	 she	 signed,	 “Please	 call	 my	 dentist	 to	 make	 an

appointment	for	me.	It	is	hard	to	make	appointments	through	the	MRC.”

Later,	 I	 played	 my	 recording	 into	 our	 TTY	 and	 could	 read	 every	 word.	 Her call	was	from	a	deafie	in	Los	Angeles	with	whom	she	was	planning	to	stay	for	a

month.

Pearl	was	planning	for	life	on	her	own.

At	morning	chore	time,	I	left	the	footpath	floodlights	off	to	enjoy	the	moonlight bathing	the	snowy	landscape.	I	stood	at	the	top	of	the	hill	and	looked	down.	The

barn	 looked	 like	 a	 spaceship	 on	 a	 chalk	 planet,	 a	 life-support	 vessel	 under	 the stars.	I	walked	down,	turned	on	the	lights,	and	squinted	until	my	night	vision	left me.	I	did	the	chores,	but	Mouse	ignored	his	feed.

I	 called	 Gus.	 “Mouse	 won’t	 eat.	 He’s	 standing	 in	 front	 of	 his	 manger	 and shifting	back	and	forth.”

“Damn	serious.	I’ll	be	right	there.”

“I’ll	leave	the	barn	lights	on.	We’ll	be	at	work	when	you	arrive.”

When	 I	 returned	 home,	 Gus’s	 Subaru	 station	 wagon	 was	 parked	 next	 to	 our truck	at	the	bottom	of	the	driveway.

Pearl	was	cooking.	“Something	is	wrong.	Gus’s	car	is	here,	so	I	didn’t	do	the

chores.	I	waited	for	you.”

I	put	my	overshoes	back	on,	Pearl	put	on	her	farm	clothes,	and	we	walked	to

the	barn.	I	was	still	in	my	suit	and	overcoat.

Gus	 and	 Donna	 were	 watching	 their	 daughter	 walk	 Mouse	 around	 a	 brown

circle	trodden	into	 the	snow.	Cigarette	 butts	lay	everywhere.	 Country	music	on the	barn	radio	added	to	the	surrealism.

“How	is	Mouse?”	I	signed	and	said.

“We	 brought	 a	 vet	 from	 the	 mainland.	 It’s	 colic.	 What	 did	 you	 feed	 him?”

said	Gus.

“The	same	as	always:	alfalfa-timothy,	Buckerfield’s	horse	mix,	vitamins.”

“The	 vet	 put	 his	 arm	 up	 his	 ass,”	 said	 Donna.	 “He	 gave	 him	 an	 enema.	 He poured	oil	down	his	nose.	He	gave	him	drugs.	No	difference.	Walking	him	is	all

we	can	do.”

“He’s	 hurtin’,”	 said	 Gus.	 “Appaloosas	 are	 tough,	 though.	 Maybe	 he’ll	 pull through.”

“Poor	Mouse!”	cried	their	daughter,	massaging	his	belly.

At	 morning	 chore	 time,	 I	 found	 Donna	 walking	 Mouse.	 A	 thermos	 bottle

stood	 atop	 a	 fencepost.	 “He	 keeps	 lying	 down	 and	 kicking.	 Next	 time	 he	 goes down,	I	don’t	know	if	he’ll	get	up.”

When	I	arrived	home	from	work,	Gus	was	sitting	in	our	kitchen,	drunk.	Pearl

leaned	against	the	counter,	frustrated	and	furious,	not	knowing	what	to	do	with

him.

“Dead!”	Gus	shouted,	his	voice	slurred.

“I’m	sorry.”	I	felt	like	an	undertaker	with	a	bereaved	family	member.

“Gone	to	the	great	Trout	Lake	in	the	sky.	I	need	another	drink.”

“Don’t	give	it	to	him,”	Pearl	signed.	I	didn’t	interpret.

“I	have	only	two	beers	left.”	I	opened	them	both,	taking	one	for	myself.	“To

Mouse,”	I	signed	and	said,	holding	up	my	can.

“He’s	lying	in	your	field.	Tomorrow	he’ll	be	frozen	solid.	I	wanna	bury	him

there.	I’ll	make	a	deal	with	Eddie	for	his	backhoe.”

When	 I	 did	 the	 chores	 the	 next	 morning,	 I	 saw	 a	 gray	 mound	 dusted	 with snow	in	the	corner	of	the	field.	Mouse	rests	under	Trout	Lake	Farm	today.

“I	decided	to	move	out.	I	work	on	Saturday,	so	I	will	leave	on	Sunday.”

I	 knew	 it	 was	 futile,	 but	 I	 signed,	 “Don’t	 go.	 Stay	 with	 Whisky	 and	 me.”	 I hugged	her.

She	 stood	 stiffly	 and	 didn’t	 hug	 me.	 “I	 am	 sorry.	 It	 will	 be	 hard	 for	 you	 in winter.	You	must	care	for	the	animals	and	keep	the	fire	burning	every	day.	Please stay	away	when	I	move.	Arlette	will	come	at	four	o’clock	to	help	me.”

“I	 will	 stay	 here	 while	 you	 are	 moving	 out	 because	 we	 must	 agree	 on	 what you	take.	Will	you	return?”

“I	 need	 to	 think.	 Everything	 changed	 after	 I	 discovered	 who	 you	 are.	 It	 is hard	for	me	to	explain	my	feelings	to	you.”

“Let’s	see	Dr.	Foreman	together.	He	helps	couples.	He	signs,	too.”

“You	go.	There	is	nothing	wrong	with	me.”

“Will	you	stay	at	Arlette’s	after	you	leave?”

“That	is	my	secret.	I	am	taking	the	truck.	I	need	to	be	independent.”

“Is	that	why	you	wanted	me	to	buy	the	jeep?	Were	you	planning	to	leave	four

months	ago?”

Pearl	walked	into	the	visitors’	room.	I	heard	the	tapping	of	keys,	so	I	put	the

Dictaphone	 next	 to	 the	 kitchen	 telephone,	 lifted	 the	 handset,	 and	 tape-recorded the	 TTY	 tones.	 When	 I	 was	 alone,	 I	 played	 the	 recording	 into	 the	 TTY	 and learned	that	Pearl	would	move	in	with	Arlette,	but	she	would	store	her	furniture

with	Arlette’s	friend,	Bruce.

On	 Saturday	 morning,	 the	 alarm	 clock	 rang	 at	 5:25	 a.m.	 I	 tapped	 Pearl	 on	 the shoulder	to	wake	her	up	for	work	and	changed	the	alarm	time	for	me	to	wake	up

for	the	morning	chores.	As	I	rolled	over,	Pearl	tapped	me	on	the	shoulder.

“Why	do	you	look	sleepy?	What	were	you	doing	while	I	was	asleep?”

Even	though	it	was	our	last	full	day	together,	I	worked	on	the	house	as	I	had

done	 every	 Saturday	 for	 three	 years.	 Saturdays	 were	 important	 because	 the Building	Centre	didn’t	open	on	Sundays	in	winter.

Pearl	brought	home	a	dozen	empty	cardboard	cartons.	She	made	dinner,	and

we	ate	in	silence.	While	she	packed	her	life	into	boxes,	I	followed	her,	both	to

spend	a	few	more	minutes	together	and	to	see	what	she	took.	She	rolled	back	the

futon	and	browsed	through	the	boxes	stored	under	it.

After	 Pearl	 packed	 her	 articles,	 including	 her	 conch,	 she	 took	 some	 of	 my electronic	items	out	of	a	box	and	set	them	aside.

“You	bought	these	during	our	marriage.”

It	was	as	if	she	had	been	briefed	on	how	to	divorce.

“I	bought	all	those	when	I	was	a	student.”

I	found	a	note	she	had	written	to	me	when	we	first	met.	As	I	began	to	read	it,

she	snatched	it	away.

“All	writing	is	mine!”

“The	notes	I	wrote	to	you	are	yours.	The	notes	you	wrote	to	me	are	mine.”

I	 insisted	 on	 keeping	 that	 treasured	 souvenir.	 I	 grabbed	 her	 arm,	 snatched back	the	note,	and	put	it	in	my	pocket.	Pearl	shattered	the	silence	with	a	scream.

“I’ll	call	the	police!”

“Shall	I	call	for	you?”

“I	will	push	the	button	on	the	emergency	dialer.”

“Then	the	ambulance	and	firemen	will	come,	too.”

“I	 will	 call	 Laurent	 myself.”	 She	 sat	 down	 at	 the	 TTY	 in	 the	 visitors’	 room but	didn’t	bother	to	close	the	door.	I	watched	her	type:

MESSAGE	RELAY	CENTRE	GA

THIS	IS	PEARL	KING	PLEASE	CALL	5555212	AND	GIVE	MY	MESSAGE	TO	RCMP	LAURENT

GA

WHAT	IS	YOUR	MESSAGE	GA

COME	NOW	DERRICK	HURT	ME	GA

PLEASE	WAIT	MESSAGE	RECEIVED	BY	PAGER	5555212	GA

THANKS	SK

“Laurent	gave	me	his	pager	number.”	With	a	smirk,	Pearl	resumed	packing,	calm

again.

I	put	 The	Joy	of	Signing	in	her	box.	She	handed	it	back	to	me.	“Maybe	you will	need	it	someday.”

“I	will	never	sign	again.”

A	tear	ran	down	Pearl’s	cheek.

She	 went	 to	 the	 family	 room	 and	 stared	 at	 the	 pictures	 leaning	 against	 the wall.	“Some	pictures	are	missing.”

“That’s	impossible.	You	can	see	three	years	of	dust.”

I	 lifted	 a	 picture,	 exposing	 a	 brown	 line	 of	 plywood	 surrounded	 by	 telltale white.

“Where	you	took	one	away,	you	put	new	dust	to	cover	the	line.”

Pearl	 browsed	 through	 the	 other	 rooms	 and	 took	 her	 fair	 share.	 We	 went downstairs	to	the	workbench.	She	turned	on	the	fluorescent	lamp	and	shivered.

She	 searched	 my	 tools	 and	 the	 rows	 of	 jars	 filled	 with	 nails	 and	 screws.	 She packed	 the	 antique	 telephone	 her	 grandfather	 had	 given	 us.	 She	 inspected	 the motorcycle,	its	tires	long	flat.

“You	bought	new	tires!”

“They’re	worn	out!	I	bought	those	in	Tucson.	Do	you	want	them?”

“No.	Where	is	Laurent?	I	called	him	a	long	time	ago.”

“He	knows	I	won’t	hurt	you,	so	he’s	giving	us	time	to	stop	arguing.”

Our	last	night	was	like	any	other.	Pearl	slept	beside	me,	giving	me	false	hope

that,	 after	 spending	 time	 in	 her	 deaf	 world	 and	 thinking	 things	 over,	 she	 might want	to	make	things	work.





How	Did	You	Find	Me?

On	Sunday,	17	January	1988,	Pearl	left	for	good.	I	woke	up	at	6:45	and	did	the

chores.

When	I	returned,	she	was	stacking	cartons	by	the	door.

She	 packed	 her	 clock	 radio	 and	 started	 dividing	 our	 pens,	 paper	 clips,	 and erasers.	She	stared	at	the	little	piles.

“Where	is	my	roach	clip?	I	demand	to	know	where	you	put	it!”

“I	don’t	know	what	you’re	talking	about.	You	never	smoked	pot	here.”

“You	 lie!”	 Her	 hands	 were	 shaking	 with	 anger,	 and	 she	 started	 to	 babble incoherently.	“You	hid	my	roach	clip	…	I	see	…	 now	I	understand	…	your	goal

…	 aha! 	…	later,	we’ll	see.”	She	sneered	and	took	three	computer	diskettes	from the	drawer.	“I	will	take	these	to	be	sure	you	cooperate.	I	don’t	want	you	to	make trouble.”

“Keep	them.	I	have	copies.	You	are	blackmailing	me.	I	don’t	like	it.”

Laurent	arrived,	in	civilian	clothes,	twelve	hours	after	Pearl	paged	him.

“Pearl	paged	me	last	night.”

“Derrick	twisted	my	arm.”

“It	looks	fine.	I	see	you’re	moving	out.	Where	are	you	going?”

“To	Arlette’s,”	she	signed.	She	took	some	paper	and	scribbled	on	it.

Behind	 her	 back,	 I	 said,	 “She’s	 going	 to	 Arlette’s,	 but	 her	 stuff	 is	 going	 to Bruce’s.	Is	he	OK?	I	don’t	want	her	to	have	trouble.”

Pearl	turned	around	before	Laurent	could	answer	and	handed	her	note	to	him

so	I	couldn’t	see	it.	Laurent	read	it.

“Derrick	already	knows.	He	said	Bruce’s	name.”

My	discovery	made	Pearl	erupt.	“Virgil	is	a	cocaine	dealer!”

“Derrick,	is	Virgil	a	cocaine	dealer?”

“He	was,	but	he	retired	many	years	ago.”

“Derrick	 searched	 his	 house	 with	 a	 detector!	 We	 rode	 to	 Mexico	 to	 bring cocaine	to	Virgil.	I	flew	back,	but	he	rode	home	alone.”

“If	he	hurts	you,	call	me.”	Laurent	had	had	enough.	As	he	walked	out,	he	said

over	his	shoulder,	“I	don’t	respect	betrayal!”

Pearl	had	lost	her	credibility	because	of	her	distorted	view	of	reality,	but	until now	 she	 had	 kept	 her	 integrity	 and	 Laurent’s	 respect.	 Now	 she	 lost	 both	 by snitching	 on	 my	 friends—irrespective	 of	 whether	 her	 statements	 might	 be	 true.

Police	look	down	on	turncoats	even	if	they	find	their	information	useful.

Whisky	barked,	and	Arlette	walked	in.	I	put	on	my	coat	and	sat	by	the	door like	a	customs	inspector	while	Pearl	and	Arlette	walked	back	and	forth	carrying

cartons	 to	 our	 Nissan	 and	 Arlette’s	 Toyota.	 It	 was	 just	 above	 freezing.	 I	 didn’t help—I	didn’t	want	to	feel	responsible	for	what	might	happen	next.

“I	 hope	 Pearl	 will	 thank	 you	 for	 helping	 her	 out	 of	 her	 marriage	 and	 her future,”	I	said	without	signing.	“I’ll	help	if	she	 returns.”

Arlette	said	nothing.	All	of	us	had	grim	looks	on	our	faces.	The	women	piled

the	 sofa	 sections	 on	 top	 of	 the	 cartons,	 tied	 down	 the	 loads,	 and	 left	 without	 a thought	 for	 Whisky	 and	 me.	 The	 way	 people	 treat	 their	 pets	 speaks	 for	 them; Pearl	 abandoned	 Whisky	 as	 easily	 as	 she	 abandoned	 me,	 as	 if	 she	 had	 never loved	either	of	us.

The	house	was	silent	except	for	the	refrigerator.	I	put	a	Bach	cassette	in	the

player—now	I	could	enjoy	music	without	guilt.

I	telephoned	my	father.

“Pearl’s	gone,”	I	stammered.

“I	 can’t	 tell	 you	 how	 much	 it	 hurts	 to	 hear	 those	 words.	 Do	 you	 want	 us	 to spend	the	night	there?”

“That	would	be	wonderful.”

“Is	there	anything	we	need	to	bring?	Did	she	take	the	TV?”

“Of	course,	she	took	the	TV,	but	I	don’t	want	a	TV.”

“Don’t	do	anything.	We’ll	get	the	next	ferry.”

I	 had	 planned	 to	 attend	 a	 performance	 of	 the	 Purcell	 String	 Quartet	 that evening,	but	I	called	Hans,	the	island’s	impresario,	to	say	I	couldn’t	attend,	and	I told	 him	 why.	 He	 suggested	 I	 read	 the	 Psalms,	 starting	 with	 Number	 23, The Lord	Is	My	Shepherd.

My	siblings	phoned	me	one	by	one	to	offer	their	support.	I	reloaded	the	gun

in	case	a	posse	of	deaf	vigilantes	like	those	in	Pearl’s	stories	paid	me	a	visit.	A few	hours	later,	my	parents	arrived	with	groceries	and	a	portable	TV.

Mother	hugged	me.	“It	must	hurt.	Your	eyes	are	red.”

“I	can’t	believe	she’s	done	it!	Pearl’s	flushed	her	future	down	the	toilet!”

“Do	you	think	she	was	frightened	by	killing	your	own	meat?”

“No.	She’s	a	country	girl.”

“You	are	better	off	without	her	unless	she	gets	treatment,”	said	Father.	“And

even	 if	 she	 gets	 treatment,	 you	 are	 better	 off	 without	 her.	 Her	 mother	 said	 her first	marriage	ended	the	same	way,	so	now	we	know	she’s	been	seeing	things	her

own	 special	 way	 for	 a	 long	 time. Don’t	 try	 to	 get	 her	 back. Don’t	 give	 her anything.”

My	mother	looked	out	at	the	moonlit	landscape.	“It	might’ve	helped	if	you’d

installed	curtains.”

In	 the	 morning,	 I	 filled	 the	 stove	 and	 lit	 the	 tinder	 with	 one	 flame	 from	 the lighter.	 I	 looked	 through	 the	 grate	 at	 the	 flicker	 of	 light	 on	 the	 corner	 of	 a newspaper,	 gliding	 across	 the	 paper,	 devouring	 the	 kindling,	 snapping	 through the	 sticks,	 and	 then	 roaring	 over	 the	 rounds	 of	 hemlock	 and	 alder.	 The	 flue thermometer	 rose	 as	 the	 stovepipe	 moaned.	 I	 remembered	 the	 first	 time	 Pearl and	I	had	built	a	fire	in	that	stove,	assisted	by	a	cup	of	paint	thinner.

I	 walked	 through	 the	 fresh	 air	 to	 the	 barn	 to	 do	 the	 chores	 and	 enjoy	 the friendship	of	the	animals	that	Pearl	would	never	see	again.	When	I	returned,	my

mother	 had	 made	 breakfast	 and	 MJB	 coffee	 and	 was	 busy	 organizing	 the

kitchen.

I	called	my	boss	to	ask	for	a	day	off,	and	he	gave	me	a	week.	“I	thought	Pearl

might	go	because,	at	the	Christmas	party,	she	asked	if	she	could	visit	us	alone.

I’ll	let	you	know	if	she	ever	comes.”

I	called	Clifford.	He	advised	me	to	cancel	our	credit	card,	take	half	the	money

out	of	our	joint	account,	open	a	new	account	in	my	name,	deposit	my	paychecks

to	my	new	account,	change	my	life	insurance	beneficiary,	change	the	locks,	and

get	receipts	for	everything	I	give	her.

I	canceled	the	appointments	I’d	made	with	Dr.	Foreman;	we’d	missed	the	first

one	by	two	weeks.	I	redirected	my	mail.	I	wrote	to	Virgil	and	asked	him	to	call

my	parents’	telephone	on	a	specified	date	and	time.

I	passed	my	bereavement	week	cleaning,	repairing,	taking	sympathetic	telephone

calls,	 throwing	 sticks	 for	 Whisky,	 and	 listening	 to	 the	 Moody	 Blues.	 I	 did	 the evening	 chores	 with	 a	 beer;	 cans	 stayed	 cold	 in	 the	 frigid	 air.	 I	 sat	 with	 the animals	and	wondered	how	much	longer	I	could	be	with	them.	I	listened	to	the

cat	scratching	in	the	loft.	A	barn	is	always	restless,	even	at	night.	I	returned	to	an empty	house.

The	 telephone	 rang.	 “Derrick,	 this	 is	 Arlette’s	 husband.	 I’m	 trying	 to	 set	 up Pearl’s	 caption	 decoder.	 Which	 connector	 is	 the	 input,	 and	 which	 one	 is	 the output?”

I	told	him	I	couldn’t	help	without	seeing	the	decoder,	which	was	true,	but	he

told	me	to	stay	away.

Sister	Nadine	visited,	and	I	took	her	on	a	scenic	gravel	roads	tour	in	the	jeep.

When	we	stopped	at	the	General	Store,	Arlette	walked	out	and	stared	at	her	as	if

we	were	dating.	I	wondered	what	she	would	tell	Pearl.

I	 drove	 to	 my	 parents’	 house	 to	 take	 Virgil’s	 call.	 I	 updated	 Virgil	 on	 the recent	events.

“Another	 one	 bites	 the	 dust.	 You	 do	 have	 trouble	 with	 women,”	 Virgil laughed.	His	laughter	was	one	of	the	reasons	we	had	remained	friends	for	half	a

lifetime,	and	it	drained	the	strain	of	the	past	months	from	me.	My	parents	stared as	I	laughed	with	him.

“Pearl	told	the	RCMP	you	are	a	dealer.	That’s	why	I	thought	you’d	better	not

call	me	at	home.	My	address	book,	with	your	name	in	it,	has	disappeared.	Pearl

must	have	stolen	it.”

“I	got	nothin’	to	hide.	When	are	you	coming	to	Snowslide?	We	could	do	some

drugs,	have	a	party.”	Virgil	burst	into	contagious	laughter.	“Life’s	too	short	to	be paranoid.	I	used	to	be	paranoid,	too,	but	I	got	over	it	when	my	cocaine	was	all

used	up!”

I	 received	 a	 call	 at	 work.	 “This	 is	 Sheehan,	 solicitor	 for	 Pearl,”	 said	 a	 raspy voice.	“What	is	the	name	of	your	solicitor?”

“I	 can’t	 afford	 a	 solicitor.”	 Eugénie	 and	 I	 hadn’t	 used	 lawyers	 when	 we divorced,	and	I	didn’t	see	why	I	needed	one	now.

“Mr.	King,	I	advise	you	to	retain	counsel.	It	is	against	professional	ethics	for

me	to	talk	to	another	lawyer’s	client.	I	need	to	know	his	name	so	that	I	can	set	up an	exploratory	meeting	to	try	to	resolve	any	issues	we	may	face	in	drawing	up	a

separation	 agreement.	 An	 interpreter	 will	 be	 provided	 by	 the	 Western	 Institute for	the	Deaf.”

“Pearl	wants	this	done	after	just	two	weeks?	I	will	represent	myself.”

“My	client	wants	a	separation	agreement	as	soon	as	possible	because	there	is

a	…	lack	of	trust.”

“Is	that	because	I’m	trying	to	kill	her	or	because	I	import	drugs?”

“I	didn’t	hear	that!	You	will	hear	from	my	secretary	shortly.”

A	storm	battered	the	island.	Rain	machine-gunned	the	windows	and	skylights.

Wind	rubbed	the	trees	together,	so	they	moaned	like	cellos,	pushed	the	warmth

out	of	the	house,	and	flipped	the	doghouse	on	its	side.	Sleep	was	impossible.	The next	morning	after	chores,	I	changed	into	my	suit,	overcoat,	galoshes,	and	gloves and	rattled	down	the	hill	in	the	jeep	just	before	dawn.	The	steering	wheel	jerked back	and	forth	as	the	tires	rolled	over	debris.	A	fallen	tree	blocked	the	driveway.

I	abandoned	the	jeep	and	hitchhiked	to	the	ferry.

That	 afternoon,	 sleep-deprived,	 I	 walked	 from	 work	 to	 Sheehan’s.	 Pearl,

Sheehan,	and	an	interpreter	were	waiting.

“This	 is	 the	 first	 time	 I’ve	 had	 a	 certified	 interpreter	 to	 talk	 to	 my	 wife,”	 I signed	and	said.

Pearl’s	eyes	alternated	between	my	hands	and	the	interpreter’s	hands.	“Only

talk!	Your	signs	are	confusing	me.”

I	had	to	sit	on	my	hands	to	stop	myself	from	signing.

“Pearl	wishes	to	be	separated,”	said	Sheehan.	“As	you	are	both	working,	have

no	children,	and	have	been	married	only	two	years,	there	is	no	alimony.	You	take back	 your	 premarital	 assets	 and	 divide	 any	 property	 acquired	 during	 the marriage.”

“I	don’t	want	to	be	separated.	I	want	Pearl	to	come	home.”

Pearl	was	still	for	a	moment.	“No.”

“I	 love	 you.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 for	 you	 to	 run	 away.”	 I	 pulled	 my	 hands	 out from	under	my	legs	and	held	them	out	to	her.

Pearl	turned	away	from	me.	“You	know	why	I	can’t	return.”

“No,	I	don’t	know.	It	doesn’t	make	sense.”

“Mr.	King!	The	purpose	of	this	meeting	is	to	agree	on	a	separation	agreement.

What	 you	 two	 do	 with	 it	 is	 not	 my	 concern.	 Pearl	 proposes	 that	 you	 keep	 the jeep,	 and	 she	 keeps	 the	 truck.	 The	 difference	 in	 value	 will	 be	 taken	 into account.”

“I	need	the	truck!	I	have	to	carry	feed	and	firewood,	tons	of	it.”

“My	 client	 is	 willing	 to	 transfer	 the	 title	 to	 the	 house	 provided	 she	 receives half	its	equity.	The	question	is:	how	much	is	an	uncompleted	house	worth?”

“I	 updated	 our	 appraisal	 last	 month,	 for	 insurance.	 $118,000.	 Pearl	 knows that.”

“My	client	arranged	her	own	appraisal:	$112,000.”

I	was	astounded	by	how	difficult	Pearl,	or	perhaps	her	advisors,	was	making

her	own	life.	“I	accept	Pearl’s	valuation.”

Pearl	 started	 to	 cry.	 “You	 know	 all	 about	 business,	 so	 I	 have	 to	 protect myself.”

“Let’s	 take	 the	 average.	 Finally,	 my	 client	 would	 like	 to	 split	 her	 legal	 fees and	costs	with	you.	She	wants	to	remain	friends.”

I	threw	my	hands	in	the	air	and	laughed.

Pearl	had	been	avoiding	the	ferries	I	usually	took,	so	I	left	work	early	to	catch the	ferry	that	she	usually	took.	I	found	her	sitting	in	the	passenger	lounge.

I	sat	down	beside	her	and	smiled.	“Hello.”

“Hello.”	Pearl	did	not	smile.

Passengers	glanced	at	us.

“You	are	beautiful,	but	you	look	exhausted.”

“You	look	tired,	too.”

“There	are	things	we	should	discuss.	Will	you	come	to	the	pub	with	me?”

Pearl	shrugged.	“OK.”

It	was	raining	when	the	ferry	docked.	Pearl	followed	me	to	the	pub,	keeping

her	distance.

“What	do	you	want	to	discuss?”

I	took	a	bank	draft	from	my	pocket.	“I	cashed	our	time	deposit.	This	is	all	of it—$3,000.	Take	it.	You	need	it.	Please	initial	the	receipt.”

“Quinn	told	me	not	to	sign	anything.”

“Quinn?	The	fingerspelling	lawyer	who	made	our	wills?”

“I	changed	lawyers.	I	don’t	like	Sheehan	now.”

“Take	 the	 check.	 You	 need	 it	 because	 I	 must	 cancel	 our	 credit	 card.”	 I	 took my	credit	card	from	my	wallet,	broke	it	in	half,	and	put	the	pieces	on	the	table.

Pearl	stared	at	me,	eyes	like	plates.	“You	can’t	do	that!”

“Take	the	check.	I	love	you,	and	you	need	it.	I	am	trying	to	help	you	as	much

as	I	can,	but	I	have	to	protect	myself.”

“That’s	awful!	You	are	mean!”	Pearl	burst	into	tears.

I	pushed	the	draft	across	the	table.	“Then	take	it	without	initialing	the	receipt.

Fuck	the	lawyers.”

She	 pushed	 the	 draft	 back	 and	 stared	 at	 me	 with	 piercing	 eyes.	 “You	 told Laurent	that	I	smoke	marijuana	and	I	need	to	see	a	doctor!”

“I	only	told	him	you	need	a	doctor.”

“Now	 I	 see	 why	 you	 took	 my	 roach	 clip.	 You	 gave	 it	 to	 Laurent	 to	 prove	 I smoke	 marijuana!”	 Pearl	 shook	 her	 head	 violently,	 tears	 pouring	 down.	 “You told	Laurent	I	need	to	see	a	psychiatrist.”

“It’s	true.	Did	he	talk	to	you	about	it?”

Pearl	 trembled	 like	 a	 boiler	 about	 to	 burst.	 “I	 know	 you	 told	 him	 because when	I	went	downtown,	all	the	policemen	were	staring	at	me!”

Pearl	ran	to	the	counter,	threw	some	money	down,	and	ran	outside.

“Is	something	wrong	with	Pearl?”	said	the	barmaid.

I	nodded.	“Things	haven’t	been	right	for	a	long	time.”

Alan	sat	next	to	me	on	the	ferry	and	put	his	hand	on	my	shoulder.

“Rose	invited	Pearl	for	dinner.	During	dinner,	we	were	stunned	by	the	depth

of	 her	 hostility	 toward	 you,	 and	 even	 Laurent.	 We	 told	 her	 it	 is	 inconceivable that	you	are	dangerous	and	preposterous	that	Laurent	is	crooked.	But	nothing	we

said	made	any	difference.”

“I	 hope	 that	 if	 she	 gets	 the	 right	 help,	 she’ll	 recover.	 But	 Pearl’s	 problem	 is that	she	won’t	seek	the	right	help,	and	she	won’t	trust	anyone	whom	she	hasn’t

chosen	herself,	a	Catch-22.”

“Did	you	know	she	moved	out	from	Arlette’s?”

“Already?	Why	did	she	leave	so	soon?”

“They	realized	Pearl	has	a	problem,	a	nervous	breakdown,	they	think,	and	her

husband	refused	to	have	anyone	unstable	around	their	kids.”

“Where	did	she	go?”

“She’s	 renting	 a	 room	 in	 a	 bloke’s	 house.	 Rose	 worries	 he	 won’t	 be	 able	 to keep	his	hands	off	her,	but	we	promised	not	to	tell	you	where	they	are.”

“Don’t	tell	me.	Hint.”

Alan	looked	out	the	window.	“Such	blue	water	today.”

I	smiled.	“Thanks.”

Each	month,	a	truckload	of	grain	passed	through	the	animals,	and	a	truckload	of

firewood	passed	through	the	stove.	By	March,	the	feed	and	the	firewood	had	run

low.	 Pearl	 had	 taken	 the	 truck,	 so	 my	 father	 helped	 me	 to	 buy	 a	 cheap	 GMC

pickup	 with	 a	 failing	 transmission.	 With	 Whisky	 in	 the	 back,	 I	 looked	 like	 a redneck.

On	my	way	to	the	barn	for	chores,	the	cat	blocked	my	path	and	meowed.	She

led	 me	 into	 the	 forest	 to	 a	 rotten	 log	 where	 four	 kittens	 were	 nestled	 inside, squeaking	 like	 mice.	 The	 cat	 curled	 up	 around	 them	 and	 purred	 like	 a	 motor, proud	 to	 show	 them	 to	 me.	 I	 picked	 up	 each	 kitten	 one	 by	 one,	 savoring	 the magic	of	a	Bowen	Island	morning.

Leo	came	to	visit	while	Maria	was	in	Mexico.	I	picked	him	up	from	the	ferry

on	a	cold,	clear	day,	walked	him	around	the	property	and	lake,	and	took	him	on	a

jeep	 tour	 of	 the	 fire	 roads	 up	 to	 the	 Mount	 Gardiner	 summit	 with	 its	 view	 of Point	Grey.	As	we	stopped	beside	the	microwave	station,	Leo	pulled	a	joint	from

his	 pocket	 and	 lit	 it.	 An	 eagle	 circled	 over	 us	 so	 closely	 that	 we	 could	 hear	 its feathers	 slicing	 through	 the	 air.	 I	 folded	 the	 windshield	 forward	 and	 started	 the jeep.	 We	 drove	 back	 to	 the	 house,	 enjoying	 the	 wind	 in	 our	 faces.	 We	 did	 the chores	together	and	listened	to	music	from	the	old	times.

In	 the	 morning,	 I	 drove	 him	 to	 the	 ferry.	 Pearl	 walked	 off	 the	 ferry	 as	 he walked	 on.	 As	 she	 passed	 my	 jeep,	 she	 signed,	 “For	 years,	 I	 never	 saw	 Leo—

now	he	comes!	Why?”	She	didn’t	pause	for	an	answer.

I	 found	 Pearl’s	 first	 divorce	 documents	 in	 the	 kitchen;	 she	 had	 overlooked	 a drawer	when	she	packed.	I	became	curious	about	what	Pearl’s	mother	had	meant

when	 she	 told	 mine,	 “Her	 first	 marriage	 ended	 the	 same	 way.”	 I	 still	 had	 our second	TTY,	so	I	could	use	it	to	talk	to	her	first	husband	if	I	could	reach	him.	I called	 his	 divorce	 lawyer,	 outlined	 our	 situation,	 and	 asked	 him	 for	 his	 former client’s	telephone	number.

He	 soon	 called	 me	 back	 and	 told	 me	 he	 had	 just	 called	 his	 number	 to	 get permission	to	give	it	to	me,	but	his	mother,	who	was	hearing,	had	taken	the	call

and	 said,	 “It	 is	 in	 the	 best	 interest	 of	 all	 parties	 if	 my	 son	 has	 no	 contact	 with Pearl	whatsoever.”

I	 heard	 a	 truck	 coming	 up	 the	 driveway.	 Whisky	 didn’t	 bark,	 so	 it	 had	 to	 be

Pearl.	 I	 opened	 the	 front	 door.	 Pearl	 climbed	 out	 of	 the	 truck,	 ignored	 Whisky, walked	halfway	to	me,	and	stood	in	the	rain.

“I	need	my	old	telephone.	The	telephone	where	I	live	doesn’t	fit	my	TTY.”

“The	old	telephone	was	in	my	condo	before	you	met	me,	but	you	can	have	it.

Come	in!	I	love	you!”

“You	lie!”	Pearl	burst	into	tears	and	ran	back	to	the	truck.	“You	are	awful!”

The	 tires	 sprayed	 gravel	 as	 she	 drove	 away.	 I	 looked	 down	 the	 hill	 and watched	her	turn	west,	toward	Bluewater.

At	twilight,	I	put	my	old	telephone	in	the	GMC	and	drove	to	the	Bluewater

neighborhood.	 I	 cruised	 up	 and	 down	 the	 lanes	 in	 the	 mist	 in	 a	 truck	 Pearl wouldn’t	 recognize.	 Before	 long,	 I	 caught	 a	 glimpse	 of	 blue	 at	 the	 crest	 of	 a driveway.	Pearl	had	parked	the	truck	behind	some	trees	but	had	not	been	able	to

hide	it.

Pearl	 was	 looking	 out	 from	 the	 basement	 through	 a	 sliding	 glass	 door	 as	 I approached.	I	offered	her	the	telephone.	She	took	it,	cringing,	the	way	an	abused dog	recoils	when	touched.

I	reached	out	to	hug	her,	and	she	froze.	She	let	me	hug	her,	but	she	was	limp.

I	stepped	back.

“Come	home.	I	love	you.”

“You	know	why	I	can’t	do	that.”	She	was	trembling.

“I	don’t	know	why.	You	are	safer	at	home	than	you	are	here.”

“Go!”	Pearl	stepped	back	and	locked	the	door.

Scapegoat	 kidded,	 and	 the	 sheep	 lambed.	 Alan	 and	 I	 disinfected,	 docked, disbudded,	 and	 castrated.	 A	 few	 days	 later,	 I	 arrived	 at	 the	 barn	 for	 morning chores	to	see	Mothergoat	standing	with	a	leg	sticking	out	of	her	vulva.	I	called

Alan.	He	rushed	over	to	help	me	try	to	save	her	life.

“Crikey!”	exclaimed	Alan.	“She’s	exhausted.”

We	 used	 Scapegoat’s	 kid	 as	 a	 model.	 Alan	 oriented	 the	 bleating	 kid	 behind Mothergoat	 until	 it	 matched	 the	 protruding	 leg.	 “I	 think	 we	 are	 looking	 at	 a foreleg.”

Alan	 wrapped	 a	 rope	 around	 Mothergoat’s	 neck,	 forelegs,	 and	 ribs	 to

improvise	a	harness.	I	took	off	my	coat,	rolled	up	my	sleeve,	poured	cooking	oil

on	my	arm,	and	slid	it	into	her	womb	past	the	protruding	leg.	I	reached	in	past

my	 elbow,	 groping,	 trying	 to	 visualize	 what	 I	 was	 feeling.	 Mothergoat	 bawled and	squirmed,	and	Alan	struggled	to	hold	her	still.

“The	pressure	in	here	is	 unbelievable! 	If	I	stop	pushing,	my	arm	will	pop	out like	a	cork.	I	can’t	figure	out	where	the	head	is.”

“Hurry	before	she	dies	and	we	lose	our	jobs.	My	colleagues	are	beginning	to

think	I’m	eccentric.”

“Shit,	I	just	poked	out	an	eye!”

“A	landmark!	Good	show!	Carry	on!”

“The	 mouth	 must	 be	 here	 somewhere.	 Ow!	 Teeth—I	 cut	 my	 finger!	 The

tongue!	…	I’m	pulling	the	mouth.	Look!—her	sides	are	widening.	He’s	turning

around.	Easy	….”

My	 arm	 slipped	 out,	 followed	 by	 the	 head	 of	 the	 dead	 kid.	 Mothergoat

delivered	the	body	onto	the	floor.	I	cut	the	umbilical	cord	and	carried	the	corpse into	the	forest.

An	 old	 friend,	 Oona,	 came	 to	 visit.	 I	 picked	 her	 up	 at	 the	 ferry,	 treated	 her	 to lunch	at	the	Snuggler,	and	took	her	on	a	tour	in	the	jeep.	I	showed	her	the	house, and	 we	 walked	 the	 trail	 to	 the	 lake.	 We	 skipped	 stones	 across	 the	 lake	 and watched	the	trout	breaching.

When	 we	 walked	 back	 to	 the	 house,	 a	 car	 was	 parked	 in	 the	 driveway.	 I hadn’t	 locked	 the	 house.	 Pearl	 was	 standing	 in	 the	 kitchen	 with	 a	 real	 estate agent.	Pearl	glared	at	Oona;	she	had	no	idea	who	she	was.	Oona	covered	her	face

with	her	hands,	embarrassed.

“Pearl	asked	me	to	look	around,”	the	agent	said.

“This	house	is	not	for	sale,”	I	said	without	signing.

“What	did	you	say?”	signed	Pearl.

“Nothing,”	I	signed.

Pearl	stormed	out	with	the	agent.

I	flew	to	Amsterdam	for	a	three-week	business	trip.	I	left	the	farm	under	Alan’s

care	and	left	Whisky	with	my	boss.	Whisky	jumped	for	joy	when	I	picked	him

up	after	I	returned.

“Whisky	 was	 a	 good	 experience	 for	 the	 kids,”	 my	 boss	 said,	 “but	 we’ve decided	not	to	get	a	puppy.”

“I’ve	accepted	a	transfer	to	Holland,	a	two-year	contract.	I’ll	clear	my	head.

My	parents	will	rent	my	house.”

My	boss	smiled.	“I	knew.	You	impressed	some	people	there.”

“I’ll	start	in	November.	That	will	give	me	time	to	complete	the	west	wing,	but

I’ll	need	another	loan.”

“I’ll	authorize	it.	It	will	be	good	for	you	to	leave.	Pearl	came	for	dinner	last

week.	You	should	have	seen	the	look	on	her	face	when	Whisky	greeted	her!	She

spoke	his	name,	the	first	time	I’d	heard	her	voice.”

“Good!	Were	you	able	to	help	her?”

“No.	 And	 because	 Whisky	 was	 here,	 I	 couldn’t	 avoid	 telling	 her	 you	 were

away.	 She	 asked	 when	 you	 would	 return.	 I	 said	 you’d	 be	 back	 tomorrow,	 to avoid	 her	 taking	 advantage	 of	 your	 absence.	 She	 revealed	 nothing	 of	 how	 she feels	 or	 what	 her	 plans	 are.	 Before	 she	 left,	 she	 came	 to	 what	 was	 surely	 the purpose	 of	 her	 visit:	 she	 asked	 me	 how	 much	 money	 you	 could	 borrow!	 I	 said you	are	already	borrowing	the	maximum.”

I	began	the	countdown	to	my	departure.	I	worked	at	my	job,	finished	my	MBA,

and	did	what	I	could	to	finish	the	house.	At	night,	I	enjoyed	time	with	my	four-

legged	friends	in	the	barn.

While	 painting	 the	 ceiling,	 I	 fell	 and	 broke	 my	 left	 arm.	 I	 called	 the ambulance	 and	 was	 ferried	 to	 the	 hospital.	 When	 I	 woke	 up,	 I	 had	 a	 cast	 from my	hand	to	my	shoulder.	I	had	horses,	sheep,	goats,	a	dog,	and	a	cat	to	care	for,	a house	to	finish,	a	woodstove	to	feed,	and	a	job	to	do—with	one	arm.	I	was	back

at	work	the	next	day,	wearing	short-sleeve	shirts	and	no	tie.	Groggy	from	opioid

painkillers,	I	did	the	chores	and	continued	finishing	the	house	with	my	right	arm, carrying	tools	in	my	belt	pouch	and	holding	nails	in	my	teeth.

A	 few	 evenings	 later,	 I	 saw	 Pearl	 on	 the	 ferry.	 I	 sat	 down	 opposite	 her,	 my arm	in	a	cast	in	a	sling.

“Let’s	have	hot	chocolate,”	I	signed	as	best	I	could	with	one	arm.

“Only	if	you	promise	no	arguing.”

When	the	ferry	docked,	she	followed	me	off	the	gangway	and	up	the	hill	to

the	pub.

Pearl	sat	as	stone-faced	as	a	statue.	“You	sign	first.”

“I	broke	my	arm.	It	hurts.	I	have	to	steer	the	jeep	with	my	legs	while	I	shift

gears.	It’s	hard	to	climb	the	hayloft	ladder	with	one	arm.”

“Everyone	is	looking	at	me.	Why	don’t	you	sign	the	separation	agreement?”

“After	you	refused	to	take	the	$3,000	draft,	I	gave	it	to	your	lawyer,	Quinn.	I

told	him	it	was	all	we	had.	Now	he	says	I	told	him	it	was	only	 half	the	money.

That’s	why.”

Pearl	sniffed	back	a	tear.	“I	don’t	trust	hearies	anymore.”

I	paid	the	bill.	We	walked	out,	followed	by	curious	eyes.	As	we	stepped	into

the	cold,	I	asked	Pearl	if	I	could	kiss	her	goodnight,	but	she	ignored	me.

She	walked	to	her	blue	pickup	truck	and	drove	away.

Laurent	sat	down	next	to	me	on	the	ferry.

“I’m	being	transferred	to	Toronto,”	he	said	with	a	sigh.	“By	the	way,	Pearl’s

accusing	me	of	stealing	her	little	black	address	book.”

“That’s	 my	 address	 book!	 I	 don’t	 have	 a	 copy,	 so	 I’ll	 lose	 some	 of	 my friends.”

“She	used	to	wave	it	around	in	the	detachment.	She	thought	it	supported	her accusations.	Then,	she	couldn’t	find	it	anymore.	She	thinks	I	swiped	it.	Imagine

that!”

I	smiled.	“Thanks,	Laurent.	I	saw	her	walk	off	the	ferry	and	into	Luisa’s	car.

She’s	 the	 agent	 who	 sold	 us	 the	 house.	 I	 went	 for	 a	 drive	 and	 saw	 her	 truck parked	in	front	of	Luisa’s.	That’s	her	third	home	in	five	months!	Her	wandering

is	heartbreaking.”

“I	feel	bad	about	Pearl.	There	is	no	way	forward	for	her.	Either	she	recovers,

realizes	 what	 she	 lost,	 and	 becomes	 depressed,	 or	 she	 doesn’t	 recover,	 remains delusional,	and	thinks	she’s	a	survivor.”

“Imagine	 how	 she	 must	 feel,	 thinking	 everybody	 is	 against	 her,	 even	 those who	love	her.	Terrified?	Betrayed?	Revengeful?	And	to	have	the	urges—and	the

advisors—that	tell	her	that	the	best	solution	is	to	run	away	from	those	who	love

her,	even	though	they	are	the	people	who	most	care	for	her.”

I	wrote	a	letter	to	Quinn	offering	a	fair	split.	He	ignored	me,	so	I	paid	Clifford	to contact	him.	Clifford	reported	Pearl	was	now	convinced	I	was	hiding	money,	so

she	 wanted,	 beside	 her	 previous	 demands,	 $20,000	 plus	 half	 the	 meat	 in	 our freezer.	Her	demand	for	money	was	outrageous	because	she	knew	that	if	we	had

money,	we	would	have	finished	the	house.

Clifford	 urged	 me	 to	 settle	 because	 there	 was	 no	 telling	 what	 she	 would	 do next.	He	promised	to	include	a	non-molestation	clause	in	our	agreement	wherein

we	 each	 promised	 not	 to	 disturb	 the	 other,	 the	 other’s	 friends,	 family,	 and colleagues,	and	the	RCMP.





Down	the	Road

I	sold	my	condo	to	raise	the	money	to	meet	Pearl’s	demand	and	to	complete	the

house	for	my	parents	to	rent.

At	the	end	of	June,	I	signed	two	documents:	our	separation	agreement	and	a

petition	for	a	no-fault	divorce	to	be	used	in	one	year	if	Pearl	hadn’t	returned.	The law	 had	 changed	 to	 permit	 no-fault	 divorce	 after	 one	 year,	 not	 three,	 as	 from Eugénie.	I	paid	out	Pearl.	I	was	separated	and	insolvent.

I	 sold	 our	 camper,	 used	 once.	 To	 clear	 Pearl’s	 items	 from	 the	 basement,	 I called	Bowen	Freight.	Two	movers	came.	I	gave	them	a	packing	list,	pointed	to

the	items,	and	asked	them	to	deliver	them	to	Pearl	at	Luisa’s	house.

“Is	this	all?	Do	it	yourself,	and	save	fifty	bucks.”

“I	can’t.	Our	separation	agreement	has	a	non-molestation	clause,	and	I	need	a

receipt	 or	 a	 witness.	 Please	 deliver	 her	 stuff	 to	 her	 personally,	 and	 ask	 her	 to initial	the	packing	list.	If	she	refuses,	be	my	witnesses.”

The	movers	took	Pearl’s	goods	and	left.	A	week	later,	I	called	them	because	I

had	heard	nothing	about	the	delivery.

“Where	is	Pearl’s	stuff?”

“At	Luisa’s.	Pearl	didn’t	sign	the	receipt.”

“Was	Pearl	home	when	you	delivered	the	goods?”

“Maybe.	Her	pickup	was	there,	so	we	put	her	stuff	in	it.	It	was	raining,	so	we

put	a	tarp	over	it.	No	charge	for	the	tarp.”

“Do	 you	 mean	 Pearl	 found	 her	 stuff	 sitting	 in	 the	 back	 of	 her	 truck	 in	 the rain?	She’ll	think	I	dumped	it	there	to	say,	‘Fuck	you.’”

“Sorry,	but	we	didn’t	want	to	see	her.	We’ve	been	hearing	strange	stories.”

I	borrowed	as	much	as	I	could	to	finish	the	house.	I	hired	the	best	contractor	I

could	find	to	do	the	framing,	walls,	ceilings,	fireplace,	and	concrete	floor.	I	did the	wiring	and	plumbing,	installed	electric	heating,	and	installed	a	Jacuzzi.	The work	took	four	months,	but	everything	was	on	time,	on	budget,	and	done	well.	I

was	getting	the	job	done,	but	without	Pearl,	my	heart	was	no	longer	in	it.	We	had learned	 from	 our	 mistakes,	 but	 Pearl	 would	 never	 benefit	 from	 our	 expensive education.

As	 I	 leaned	 over	 the	 ferry	 railing,	 Luisa	 brushed	 past	 me.	 “Go	 to	 the	 smoking lounge.	Wait	for	me.”	She	walked	away	without	pausing.	I	walked	upstairs	and

entered	the	smoking	lounge.

Luisa	lit	a	cigarette.

“Pearl	 was	 living	 with	 me.	 I	 wanted	 to	 help	 her,	 and	 she	 could	 babysit	 my kids	 for	 free.	 But	 she’s	 out	 of	 her	 goddamn	 mind!”	 The	 others	 in	 the	 lounge pretended	 not	 to	 listen.	 “Holy	 Jesus,	 she’s	 nuts!	 She	 threatened	 my	 kid’s	 eye with	a	pencil!	I	shouted	at	her	to	get	the	fuck	out	of	my	house.	I	don’t	want	her crazy	shit	near	my	kids.	I	told	her	to	take	all	her	crap	and	go.”

It	 hurt	 me	 to	 picture	 the	 scene	 and	 hear	 Pearl	 was	 so	 lost,	 always	 running down	the	road,	always	away	from	danger,	never	finding	sanctuary.

Gus	 asked	 me	 to	 join	 his	 Bowen	 Island	 Pentathlon	 team	 in	 a	 relay	 race	 for riding,	 running,	 swimming,	 canoeing,	 and	 cycling.	 He	 was	 the	 rider;	 I	 was	 the runner.	 I	 called	 Eugénie	 and	 invited	 her	 to	 Bowen	 Island	 to	 see	 the	 race.	 Our team	 came	 in	 last.	 Eugénie	 enjoyed	 the	 event	 and	 my	 jeep	 tour	 and	 was impressed	 by	 the	 property.	 The	 woman	 I	 once	 loved	 was	 visiting	 me,	 yet	 the woman	I	still	loved	was	avoiding	me.

The	 Bowen	 Island	 Country	 Fair	 marked	 the	 end	 of	 summer,	 and	 it	 was	 my father’s	 sixty-fifth	 birthday.	 My	 parents,	 brother,	 sister-in-law,	 and	 their	 baby visited	 for	 the	 occasion.	 It	 was	 a	 perfect,	 sunny	 day.	 Children	 had	 their	 faces painted	while	adults	browsed	stalls	and	played	tug-of-war.

We	 were	 eating	 at	 a	 picnic	 table	 when	 my	 mother	 shouted,	 “Oh,	 my	 God!

Derrick!	Look	behind	you!”

I	saw	Pearl	in	the	distance,	alone.	When	she	saw	me,	she	stopped	and	stared

at	me	with	a	faraway	look	on	her	face.

“I	haven’t	seen	Pearl	since	she	moved	off	the	island	a	few	months	ago.”

My	mother	waved	to	her.	“I	 must	talk	to	her.”

Pearl	walked	toward	us	but	stopped	several	meters	away.

Mother	walked	to	Pearl	and	hugged	her.	“Don’t	 do	 this,”	 my	 mother	 signed and	 said,	 struggling	 to	 remember	 the	 ASL	 she	 studied.	 “Derrick	 loves	 you.	 We all	love	you.	Come	back	 home.”

“Stop!”	Pearl	shook	her	head	and	walked	away.

Mother	returned	to	our	table.	“That’s	not	the	Pearl	I	knew.”

“What’s	she	doing	here?”	said	Father.

“I	haven’t	a	clue.	She	has	no	friends	left	on	Bowen.”

About	an	hour	later,	as	we	were	standing	by	the	bandstand	listening	to	a	jazz

quintet,	 we	 saw	 Pearl	 in	 the	 crowd,	 still	 alone.	 None	 of	 us	 dared	 to	 wave.	 She walked	toward	us	and,	as	she	passed	by	my	brother’s	stroller,	leaned	forward	to

see	 her	 first	 niece.	 For	 her	 baby’s	 safety,	 my	 sister-in-law	 instinctively	 shoved the	stroller	beyond	Pearl’s	reach.

Pearl	became	manic.

“Psychological	abuse!	You	gave	me	psychological	abuse!	I	understand	what

you	did	to	me!	I’m	so	 mad! ”

We	stared	at	her,	as	did	other	fair-goers.	We	were,	for	the	first	time,	afraid	to be	near	her.

Pearl	turned	and	stormed	off.

It	was	27	August	1988.	We	never	saw	each	other	again.

The	police	called.	“This	is	Corporal	Argue	from	North	Vancouver	RCMP.	Your

wife	is	still	coming	in	and	harassing	us	about	being	in	the	drug	trade.	She	never mentions	you	anymore;	now	she’s	after	us.	We’d	like	to	help	her.	Do	you	know

anyone	who	can	guide	her	to	a	mental	health	practitioner?	Her	doctor,	a	friend,	a relative?	How	can	we	contact	her	parents?”

“Her	mother	lives	on	East	Fourth,	around	the	corner	from	you.”

“She	told	us	her	mother	lives	in	Alberta!”

“She’s	lying.	Call	me	if	there’s	anything	I	can	do.”

A	couple	of	weeks	later,	I	called	Leo	and	asked	him	to	search	Pearl	and	me	in

the	police	databases.

He	reported,	“You	have	two	records:	when	your	dog	was	impounded	and	your

wife	tried	to	have	you	arrested.	Pearl	has	a	large	file.	She	was	recently	arrested under	Section	27.”

“What’s	‘Section	27’?”

“Section	 27	 of	 the	 Mental	 Health	 Act	 is	 for	 involuntary	 admission	 to	 a psychiatric	facility	for	up	to	three	days.	Pearl	accused	her	neighbors	of	theft	and threatened	 them.	 The	 RCMP	 decided	 she	 was	 a	 hazard	 to	 herself	 or	 others,	 so she	was	admitted	 for	examination.	The	 record	doesn’t	say	 what	happened	after

that	because	the	police	were	no	longer	involved.”

“What	impression	does	her	file	make?”

“Loony	 but	 harmless,	 not	 to	 be	 taken	 seriously.	 I	 saw	 her	 in	 the	 gym	 last week.	 Gold’s	 Gym	 is	 expensive—how	 can	 she	 afford	 it?	 I	 smiled,	 but	 she scowled	and	ignored	me.”

My	departure	day	grew	closer.	I	savored	each	remaining	day	as	the	damp	autumn

grayness	returned	and	the	clocks	were	turned	back	to	winter	time.	Every	time	I

drove	onto	the	Howe	Sound	Queen,	I	tried	to	be	first	so	I	could	park	at	the	bow,

where	 I	 had	 an	 unobstructed	 view	 of	 the	 mountains	 and	 the	 stars	 over	 Howe Sound	 on	 clear	 nights	 while	 the	 ferry	 gently	 rolled.	 It	 was	 magic.	 I	 hated	 to leave.	Pearl	should	have	been	with	me.

I	 drove	 to	 Eagle	 Cliff	 and	 walked	 up	 to	 Stanley’s	 house,	 but	 the	 house	 had

vanished	 as	 if	 it	 had	 never	 existed.	 Their	 trailer	 had	 been	 vandalized	 and	 was surrounded	by	weeds.

Alan	and	Rose	took	the	sheep	and	goats	to	auction.	As	they	led	Mothergoat

and	Scapegoat	away,	Dream	smashed	through	the	barn	door	and	ran	after	them;

only	the	electrified	gate	stopped	him	from	following	his	beloved	caprine	friends.

Dream’s	 owner	 came	 to	 walk	 him	 away.	 In	 two	 years,	 she	 never	 rode	 him once.	I	refilled	the	cat	food,	switched	off	the	fence,	and	swept	out	the	barn,	now deserted	 except	 for	 the	 cat.	 I	 stared	 at	 the	 DE	 MAL	 EN	 PIS	 sign	 over	 the	 barn door, From	Bad	to	Worse; 	how	prophetic	it	had	been.

I	gave	Whisky	and	the	kittens	away	and	sold	the	surplus	fodder.	Trout	Lake

Farm	had	earned	$12,000	from	horse	boarding	plus	$5,000	from	meat	and	hay,

less	 $4,000	 in	 expenses.	 It	 had	 consumed	 thirty	 tons	 of	 hay	 and	 grain,	 all	 of	 it handled	by	Pearl	and	me.	It	had	been	satisfying,	unforgettable	fun.

The	finishing	touch	to	the	house	was	secondhand	broadloom	laid	by	a	hippie

who	lived	in	a	geodesic	dome,	drove	a	truck	with	a	cedar-shake	roof,	and	gave

his	customers	marijuana.

My	parents	moved	into	the	house	and	cared	for	it	as	if	it	were	their	own.	They

adopted	the	cat,	had	her	spayed,	and	kept	her	on	the	porch	near	them	instead	of

alone	in	the	barn.

Bowen	 Freight	 shipped	 my	 goods.	 I	 walked	 around	 the	 property	 for	 the	 last time.	 I	 walked	 around	 the	 empty	 barn	 and	 listened	 to	 my	 footsteps	 on	 the concrete.	I	realized	I	hadn’t	heard	my	footsteps	in	the	barn	for	years	because	the sound	had	been	masked	by	bleating,	neighing,	and	grunting,	and	by	the	clatter	of

horseshoes.

At	the	top	of	the	upper	field,	I	climbed	up	the	chair	I	had	carved	into	a	stump,

and	smoked	the	joint	the	carpet-layer	had	given	me.	From	there,	I	saw	the	grass

grew	 greenest	 over	 Mouse’s	 grave.	 I	 turned	 my	 collar	 against	 the	 wind	 and walked	to	Trout	Lake.

In	the	house,	I	wandered	from	room	to	room,	sad	that	Pearl	would	never	see	it

completed.	 It	 was	 a	 wonderful	 house.	 The	 beast	 that	 had	 nearly	 swallowed	 us had,	at	last,	been	tamed.

My	 parents	 drove	 me	 to	 the	 ferry	 with	 my	 suitcases.	 The	 air	 was	 salty	 and crisp.	Cormorants	walked	on	the	dock.	Gulls	and	grebes	floated	in	the	marina.	I

took	the	ferry,	then	a	taxi	to	the	airport.

I	 arrived	 in	 Amsterdam	 like	 a	 sailor	 putting	 ashore	 after	 a	 storm,	 disoriented, unable	to	lose	my	sea	legs.	I	dreamed	of	Bowen	Island	every	night;	I	dreamed	of

Pearl	every	night.	I	had	had	the	time	of	my	life.	After	reaching	the	peak,	one	no longer	needs	to	climb,	so	I	lived	to	work	now,	instead	of	working	to	live.	I	lived

the	serial	life	Ralph	had	mocked.

I	 told	 no	 one	 about	 Pearl—who	 would	 believe	 our	 story?	 Every	 night,	 I bolted	my	apartment	door	to	hide	from	the	world.	Dutch	conversation	excluded

me	 as	 much	 as	 English	 conversation	 had	 excluded	 Pearl;	 I	 realized	 now	 how Pearl	felt	when	I’d	been	too	lazy	to	interpret.

I	 was	 miserable,	 hollow,	 unable	 to	 accept	 how	 our	 lives	 had	 blown	 apart;	 I was	 in	 denial.	 I	 wrote	 the	 first	 of	 three	 letters	 to	 Pearl,	 the	 longest	 and	 most passionate	I	had	ever	written.

I	 told	 her	 I	 wanted	 her	 to	 be	 with	 me,	 and	 I	 would	 stop	 the	 divorce	 if	 she wanted.	I	said	I	thought	of	her	all	the	time	and	couldn’t	keep	my	hands	still	when I	 talked	 to	 people	 because	 the	 signs	 still	 came.	 I	 gave	 her	 my	 address	 and telephone	number.	I	begged	her	to	write	or	to	call	me	via	the	MRC.	I	promised	to

send	her	a	return	ticket	as	soon	as	she	asked	me.	I	closed	my	letter	with:	Write	or call	me.	Do	it	now.	It’s	so	important.	I	would	marry	you	all	over	again	because

you	were	so	wonderful	for	so	long.

When	my	goods	arrived,	I	watched	my	hands	lift	my	former	life	from	cardboard

cartons.	The	first	boxes	gave	up	my	stereo,	music,	and	tequila.	I	poured	a	shot,

then	 more.	 Memories	 flooded	 in	 as	 I	 unpacked. There	 were	 our	 whitewash-splattered	 overalls	 with	 barbed-wire	 holes. There	 was	 our	 meat	 grinder.	 I	 hung Pearl’s	overalls	in	my	cupboard,	cried	for	her,	and	collapsed.

I	 wandered	 the	 cobblestoned	 streets	 and	 looked	 for	 sign	 language,	 but	 the deafies	 in	 Holland	 were	 invisible.	 I	 saw	 Pearl’s	 visage	 in	 every	 pretty	 black-haired	woman.	I	would	awaken	in	the	middle	of	the	night,	worried	I	had	missed

her	call.	Never	did	I	do	the	right	thing:	talk	to	people.	All	I	could	see	inside	a	bar was	acrid	tobacco	smoke	and	people	who	might	make	it	necessary	to	talk	about

my	past	or	to	lie	about	it.

As	 Hans	 had	 suggested	 the	 night	 Pearl	 left,	 I	 read	 the	 Psalms,	 starting	 with Number	 23,	 then	 the	 New	 Testament;	 but	 I	 remained	 a	 non-believer.	 I	 told	 no one	about	my	past,	except	that	I	was	divorced.	Instead	of	talking	to	others	about my	life	with	Pearl,	I	wrote	it	down.	From	those	notes,	this	book	began.

Exchanging	 letters	 with	 Virgil	 comforted	 me.	 Our	 friendship	 had	 outlasted my	marriages.

February	1989

Dear	Derrick,

My	 spirits	 soared	 when	 I	 got	 your	 letter.	 You’re	 off	 and	 running	 on	 a	 new adventure.	Have	at	it.	Don’t	go	falling	in	love	with	anyone	that	isn’t	rich,	and	for that	advice	I	expect	to	be	supported	for	the	rest	of	my	life	when	you	do	marry	a

rich	 French	woman.	No	reason	for	French	except	I	like	France	and	it	would	be great	visiting	your	France	country	manor.

Don’t	worry	about	Pearl.	Men	are	supposed	to	love	and	lose.	Next	time	 rich, nothing	else—but	if	you	get	good	looks	with	it	so	much	the	luckier.	I	don’t	take my	own	advice	but	Rhea	does	own	a	house	of	her	own	so	she	has	someplace	to

go	if	it	ends.

Winter	has	had	its	storms	but	all	and	all	it’s	been	fun	and	full	of	adjustments on	both	of	us.	One	must	have	a	city	and	country	manor	remember	that	Derrick.

I’m	too	stoned	to	write	more.	Soon	I’ll	be	down	to	one	syllable	words	then	Xs.

Have	fun	and	remember,	Rich	with	a	French	accent,	two	homes,	and	good	looks

if	it	happens.	Good	luck.

Love,	Virgil

The	telephone	rang	in	the	middle	of	the	night.	I	leaped	out	of	bed	and	ran	to	the telephone,	my	heart	pounding.	She	had	read	my	letter!

“This	is	the	Message	Relay	Centre	with	a	call	for	Derrick	from	Pearl.”

“This	is	Derrick.”

“Where	is	the	diamond	ring	appraisal?	Go	ahead.”

“If	I	have	it,	I	will	send	it	to	you.	Go	ahead.”

“Someone	switched	the	diamonds	in	my	ring.	Go	ahead.”

“That’s	impossible.	Go	ahead.”

“Is	there	any	other	message?”	said	the	operator,	after	a	pause.

I	felt	devastated.	I	took	a	deep	breath.	“No.”

In	the	morning,	I	found	our	appraisal,	for	$9,325,	but	a	pawnshop	would	offer

much	less.	Her	call	meant	that	she	tried	to	pawn	her	beautiful	ring.	I	mailed	the appraisal	to	Pearl	with	my	second	letter.

My	 second	 letter	 was	 shorter	 and	 more	 cautious.	 I	 told	 her	 I	 was	 waiting faithfully	and	there	had	been	no	woman	after	her.	I	urged	her	to	write	to	me	or

visit	me,	and	again	I	offered	to	send	her	a	ticket.	I	told	her	I	would	always	love her.

I	didn’t	expect	a	reply.	I	felt	guilty	that	it	had	taken	me	so	long	to	see	she	was falling	apart.	Perhaps	her	Mr.	Right	had	never	existed.

Clifford	mailed	me	a	copy	of	our	divorce	certificate.	Eleven	days	later,	I	received a	 letter	 from	 a	 lawyer	 stating	 Pearl	 was	 filing	 for	 divorce.	 Incredulous,	 I telephoned	Clifford.

“Pearl’s	 lawyer	 doesn’t	 know	 she’s	 divorced!	 Now	 she’s	 asking	 that	 the

separation	 settlement	 be	 amended	 to	 give	 her	 more	 furniture	 in	 return	 for	 the stereo	in	the	truck,	which	she	wants	to	mail	to	Amsterdam.”

“I’m	not	surprised.	Your	divorce	was	difficult.	You	didn’t	know	where	Pearl was	living,	so	serving	documents	by	registered	mail	was	impossible.	A	Process

Server	in	uniform	had	to	visit	her	place	of	employment,	the	post	office,	and	ask

the	management	to	take	him	to	her	and	to	identify	her.	Then	he	had	to	confirm

her	 identity	 from	 the	 photo	 you	 gave	 me.	 When	 he	 tried	 to	 serve	 her	 the documents,	 she	 became	 hostile,	 so	 he	 had	 to	 throw	 them	 at	 her	 feet.	 Imagine what	her	colleagues	thought!	Then	he	had	to	swear	an	Affidavit	of	Service.	This

is	Pearl’s	third	divorce	lawyer.	I’ll	call	him	now.”

Pearl	 had	 paid	 three	 divorce	 lawyers;	 Eugénie	 hadn’t	 paid	 even	 for	 one.

Clifford	called	back	to	confirm	we	were	divorced.

I	wrote	Pearl	for	the	third	and	last	time.	My	last	letter	was	short.	I	told	her	we were	already	divorced,	and	that	I	had	paid	for	it.	I	reminded	her	that	divorce	was not	what	I	wanted;	it	was	what	 she	wanted.	I	told	her	I	still	loved	her.	I	told	her	I wanted	to	hold	her	again,	see	her	smile,	and	hear	her	laugh.	I	didn’t	offer	to	send a	ticket.	I	asked	her	to	write.

November	1989

Dear	Virgil,

I	got	a	letter	from	Eugénie	who	said	that	Pearl	had	phoned	her!	She	wanted

to	get	together	with	Eugénie	and	discuss	“all	the	awful	things”	I	did	to	both	of them.	Eugénie	hung	up	on	her.

I	went	to	Spain,	Czechoslovakia,	Sweden,	Norway,	Sri	Lanka,	India,	Maldives

(12	scuba	dives!),	Nepal,	and	Pakistan.	I	wanted	to	look	up	my	Spanish	pen-pal, but	her	address	was	in	my	little	black	book	that	Pearl	handed	to	the	police,	lost forever.	 In	 ten	 days	 I	 fly	 to	 Egypt	 and	 Kenya	 to	 spend	 Christmas	 alone.	 I’ll	 go overland	to	Tanzania	and	Uganda.	I	have	a	ticket	to	the	Philippines,	Indonesia, Malaysia,	Singapore,	Thailand,	and	Burma	in	March.

I	like	being	on	the	move.	I	like	the	sense	of	disconnection	from	the	present,	or maybe	of	leaving	something	behind.	“He	travels	fastest	who	travels	alone,”	said Kipling.

When	not	traveling	I	read,	write,	ride	horseback,	sail	(a	friend	has	a	sailboat) and	 tinker	 with	 toys.	 I’d	 rather	 be	 cutting	 firewood	 or	 shoveling	 horseshit	 on Bowen,	but	that	must	wait.

Love,	Derrick

My	telephone	woke	me	up;	it	could	only	be	Pearl.	The	timing	was	surreal:	just

two	 months	 before	 her	 call,	 while	 traveling	 and	 lonely,	 I	 met	 the	 woman	 who would	become	my	third	wife.	We	had	become	engaged,	and	our	wedding	was	set

for	next	month.

If	Pearl	had	called	me	before	I	had	become	engaged,	I	would	have	listened.	If she	 had	 been	 asking	 for	 help,	 I	 would	 have	 given	 it.	 If	 she	 had	 been	 asking	 to reconcile,	I	would	have	sent	her	a	ticket.	I	had	never	stopped	loving	her,	but	she called	after	I	had	given	up.	I	couldn’t	talk	to	her	now	without	being	unfaithful	to my	fiancée.	Why	had	Pearl	waited	so	long	to	call	me?

“Message	Relay	Centre	with	a	call	to	Derrick	from	Pearl.”

“How	are	you?	I’m	fine.	Go	ahead,”	said	Pearl.

“I’m	fine.	How	are	you?	Go	ahead.”

“I	already	said	I’m	fine.	Why	do	you	ask	me	again?	Go	ahead.”

“Because	it	is	four	o’clock	in	the	morning,	and	I’m	sleepy.	Go	ahead.”

“You	did	not	call	me.	Go	ahead.”

“You	 never	 told	 me	 your	 telephone	 number.	 I	 wrote	 you	 many	 times.	 Why didn’t	you	write	me?	Go	ahead.”

“You	wrote	me	three	letters.	Go	ahead.”

“You	wrote	me	no	letters.	I	waited	two	years.”	If	Pearl	had	been	calling	to	ask

for	help	or	reconciliation,	she	would	not	have	started	the	call	by	bickering.	I	had to	 estrange	 Pearl	 for	 my	 fiancée	 and	 our	 future	 children.	 I	 could	 never	 have imagined	I	would	ever	tell	Pearl	not	to	call	me,	but	I	said,	“Please	don’t	call	me anymore.”	I	hung	up.	I	felt	defeated	by	fate.

A	few	minutes	later,	the	telephone	rang	again.

“Message	Relay	Centre	with	a	call	to	Derrick	from	Pearl.”

“Why	did	you	hang	up?	I	wasn’t	finished	yet.	Go	ahead.”

“Never	call	me	again,”	I	whispered,	and	I	unplugged	the	telephone.





Love	for	a	Deaf	Rebel

I	reconnected	with	Pearl’s	family	thirty	years	later.	We	shared	our	knowledge	of

Pearl’s	 life	 and	 our	 independent	 research	 into	 her	 genealogy.	 Together,	 we learned	the	shocking	truth.

Pearl	had,	most	likely,	inherited	the	foundation	of	schizophrenia	from	her	father.

There	 is	 evidence	 of	 dysfunction	 in	 almost	 every	 paternal	 family	 member	 over generations	 and	 similar	 traits	 in	 many	 of	 the	 women	 they	 married.	 Pearl’s bigamist,	 criminal	 grandfather,	 whose	 older	 brother	 died	 in	 jail,	 had	 at	 least eleven	live	births	by	four	wives;	one	wife,	married	under	an	alias,	was	his	half-sister.	 He	 had	 two	 wives	 pregnant	 at	 the	 same	 time.	 Four	 children	 died	 in infancy,	 and	 two	 drowned	 with	 him.	 Only	 four	 children	 outlived	 him.	 He	 gave up	 Pearl’s	 father	 for	 adoption	 and	 never	 saw	 him	 again.	 Pearl’s	 father	 was adopted	by	his	great-aunt	Ida,	a	blind	Seventh-day	Adventist.

Pearl’s	 deafness	 was,	 almost	 certainly,	 not	 from	 random	 chance	 but	 from	 her parents’	 and	 grandparents’	 rush	 to	 conceal	 her	 illegitimate	 conception	 from	 the Seventh-day	Adventist	Church,	of	which	her	maternal	grandfather	was	an	elder.

In	March	1953,	Pearl’s	twenty-year-old	father,	a	salesman,	made	his	nineteen-

year-old	 girlfriend	 pregnant.	 Her	 family	 decided	 they	 must	 marry	 before	 the birth,	 but	 an	 Adventist	 pastor	 could	 not	 marry	 a	 pregnant	 woman.	 This

prohibition	was	side-stepped	by	marrying	before	her	pregnancy	was	visible.

Their	 large	 wedding	 was	 held	 on	 29	 June	 in	 the	 hamlet	 of	 Peoria,	 her hometown,	 when	 Pearl’s	 mother	 was	 three	 months	 pregnant—a	 “shotgun

wedding.”	 That	 is	 when	 Pearl’s	 mother	 caught	 rubella—German	 measles—

probably	from	one	of	the	dozens	of	children	at	her	wedding.	There	was	now	an

eighty	 percent	 chance	 Pearl	 would	 be	 born	 with	 birth	 defects	 ranging	 from deafness	to	fatal	heart	disease.

After	the	wedding,	Pearl’s	parents	moved	to	tiny	Bruderheim,	500	km	away,

for	about	nine	months.	Pearl	was	born	there	on	Christmas	Eve,	1953,	deaf	from

congenital	 rubella	 syndrome.	 The	 family’s	 hide-the-pregnancy	 ruse	 had

succeeded,	but	Pearl’s	hearing	had	been	destroyed.

Pearl’s	childhood	was	a	happy,	loving	one,	as	Pearl	and	her	family	all	attested,

but	 she	 was	 always	 paranoid,	 accusing	 people	 of	 speaking	 or	 snickering	 about her	behind	her	back.

As	 she	 grew	 up,	 she	 would	 lash	 out	 in	 brief	 incidents.	 Her	 minor	 episodes increased	in	frequency	and	severity.	At	about	thirteen,	she	violently	attacked	her five-year-old	brother.

Her	father’s	death,	when	she	was	fourteen,	was	a	terrible	blow.	Although	he

was	a	hard-working	family	man,	he	raced	stock	cars,	drove	recklessly,	and	was

fined	 for	 speeding.	 At	 thirty-four,	 he	 was	 promoted,	 and	 for	 one	 year,	 the family’s	 future	 looked	 bright.	 But	 at	 thirty-five,	 he	 killed	 himself	 and	 injured three	of	his	children	by	racing	against	his	wife’s	car.	He	was	thrown	out	of	his

car,	 which	 crushed	 him.	 Despite	 a	 police	 report	 exonerating	 her	 mother,	 Pearl became	convinced	her	mother	had	deliberately	caused	the	accident.

At	sixteen,	Pearl	threatened	her	mother	that	she	was	going	to	get	a	gun	and

shoot	 her.	 Her	 mother	 sent	 her	 to	 psychiatrists,	 but	 Pearl	 would	 only	 see	 those who	didn’t	question	her	stories,	so	she	didn’t	get	the	help	she	needed.

At	seventeen,	Pearl	was	raped.	She	and	her	sister	had	gone	to	a	dance.	Pearl

had	agreed	with	her	mother	that	she	would	go	home	with	her	sister,	but	when	it

was	 time	 to	 leave,	 she	 said	 her	 friend,	 a	 hearing	 man,	 was	 going	 to	 drive	 her home.	The	RCMP	called	at	5:00	a.m.	to	report	that	Pearl	was	in	the	hospital	after being	raped	and	left	on	the	road.	Her	mother	picked	her	up	a	few	hours	later.	The rapist	was	sentenced	to	five	years.	Pearl	had	been	raped	in	an	acquaintance-rape, not	 in	 a	 gang-rape	 as	 she	 had	 told	 me.	 There	 had	 been	 no	 abduction,	 no	 other men,	no	surgery,	and	no	physical	scar.

Deafie	 friendships	 bored	 Pearl.	 She	 would	 meet	 hearies,	 who	 would	 be

intrigued	 because	 she	 was	 vivacious	 and	 pretty,	 and	 they	 would	 make	 her	 the center	of	attention.	But	as	soon	as	hearies	accepted	Pearl	as	an	equal,	she	would break	 off	 their	 relationship.	 Because	 her	 hearie	 relationships	 never	 lasted,	 her mother	encouraged	her	to	socialize	with	deafies.

At	twenty,	Pearl	attended	St.	Paul	Technical	Vocational	Institute	(TVI),	where

she	met	her	first	husband.	She	enjoyed	her	time	there,	and	she	matured.	She	was

in	a	hearing	environment	that	was	accessible,	through	interpreters,	and	she	was

surrounded	 by	 hearies	 accustomed	 to	 seeing	 ASL.	 Pearl	 earned	 a	 one-year certificate	 as	 a	 Medical	 Laboratory	 Assistant,	 one	 of	 dozens	 of	 vocational certificates	offered.

Nine	 months	 after	 she	 married,	 Pearl	 came	 to	 believe	 that	 her	 first	 husband was	 gay.	 She	 abandoned	 him	 and	 returned	 to	 Canada.	 Later,	 he	 remarried	 and had	a	son.

Her	volatility	increased.	She	would	explode	and	rage,	destroying	things	and

threatening	to	harm	others.	She	sent	her	mother	shocking	letters	and	messages,

discovered	in	a	box	after	her	mother’s	death,	that	blamed	her	for	everything	and

threatened	 her	 with	 harm,	 even	 though	 her	 mother	 loved	 her	 and	 had	 supplied

support	whenever	Pearl	had	needed	it.

At	twenty-seven,	Pearl	moved	in	with	hard-of-hearing	Eddy,	who	was	decent

and	showed	no	signs	of	a	drinking	problem.	A	year	later,	she	became	pregnant.	It

appears	Pearl	desired	Eddy’s	baby	for	several	months	but	then	came	to	believe

he	 was	 an	 alcoholic,	 so	 she	 aborted	 their	 child	 in	 her	 second	 trimester	 and	 left him.	 A	 late-term	 abortion	 is	 the	 most	 plausible	 origin	 of	 what	 she	 told	 me	 was her	“gang-rape	scar.”	Whether	she	came	to	believe	her	fabrication	is	unknown.

At	twenty-nine,	a	year	before	we	met,	Pearl	suffered	the	most	violent	episode

known	to	her	family:	she	went	berserk	in	her	condominium	and	destroyed	most

of	her	furniture	and	possessions.	She	rented	an	apartment	across	the	street	from

me,	and	our	love	story	began.

At	 thirty-seven,	 three	 months	 before	 she	 called	 me	 for	 the	 last	 time,	 Pearl	 was diagnosed	 with	 paranoid	 schizophrenia.	 Her	 mother	 made	 a	 declaration	 to	 the Supreme	Court	that	Pearl	had	become	incapable	of	managing	her	affairs	because

of	 mental	 infirmity.	 She	 lost	 the	 legal	 capacity	 to	 make	 decisions	 about	 her treatment,	 finances,	 property,	 and	 residence,	 and	 the	 Court	 appointed	 a	 Public Guardian	and	Trustee	to	make	these	decisions	on	her	behalf.	Pearl	began	lifelong

treatment,	lost	her	job,	and	began	living	on	long-term	disability	and	government

assistance.	She	lives	in	a	group	home	for	deaf	people.	Pearl	never	had	children,

and	 we	 had	 been	 lucky	 that	 Frank’s	 fraud	 had	 caused	 us	 to	 delay	 pregnancy;	 I hate	to	think	what	the	consequences	would	have	been	if	we	had	started	a	family

—especially	for	our	child.

The	 Resource	 Centre	 for	 Abused	 Women,	 and	 other	 misguided	 helpers	 like

Arlette,	had	been	a	disaster	for	Pearl,	reinforcing	her	delusions,	“helping”	her	to leave	the	best	life	she	would	ever	have,	and	delaying	her	diagnosis	and	treatment by	two	years.	By	then,	Pearl	had	lost	two	husbands,	two	homes,	three	chances	at

a	family,	her	last	job,	and	her	independence.

A	 few	 years	 after	 her	 diagnosis,	 Pearl’s	 brother	 was	 also	 diagnosed	 with paranoid	schizophrenia.	He	 is	unable	to	 maintain	relationships,	and	 he	lives	on the	streets.

At	forty-five,	Pearl	was	spotted	by	my	parents	in	McDonald’s,	“looking	like	a

burned-out	shopgirl.”	She	turned	her	back	on	two	people	who	had	loved	her	and

had	tried	so	much	to	help	her.

At	fifty-five,	Pearl	joined	a	class-action	lawsuit	against	the	Alberta	School	for the	 Deaf.	 In	 her	 statement,	 she	 said	 her	 teachers	 had	 fondled,	 raped,	 and sodomized	 her	 in	 primary	 school.	 Although	 she	 had	 liked	 going	 to	 school,	 had done	 well	 in	 school,	 and	 had	 never	 previously	 mentioned	 childhood	 sexual abuse,	 Pearl	 now	 claimed,	 “school	 destroyed	 my	 life,”	 and	 because	 of	 her

school,	“she	developed	schizophrenia.”	The	lawsuit	was	denied	under	the	Statute of	Limitations.

Pearl’s	 family	 knew	 she	 was	 unstable,	 had	 seen	 psychiatrists,	 and	 had	 been violent,	 but	 her	 family	 decided	 to	 withhold	 her	 history	 from	 me	 because	 they could	see	how	much	we	loved	each	other,	and	they	wanted	to	give	her	a	chance

to	have	a	family.	We	all	shared	a	deep	love	for	Pearl,	and	if	I	had	been	in	their position,	 I	 would	 have	 given	 her	 that	 chance,	 too.	 The	 secrecy,	 intended	 to support	 her,	 gave	 Pearl	 three	 happy	 years	 of	 remission	 followed	 by	 three terrifying	 years	 of	 struggle	 before	 she	 was	 diagnosed	 and	 obliged	 to	 begin psychotherapy.

While	 Pearl	 struggled	 with	 schizophrenia,	 I	 left	 hobby-farming	 behind,

pursued	my	career	around	the	world,	had	children,	and	prospered.	Decades	later,

after	the	fields	had	reverted	to	forests,	I	sold	the	property	to	Rokus’s	son.

Could	 I	 have	 had	 my	 career	 with	 a	 deaf	 wife?	 Absolutely.	 With	 a	 wife	 so disabled	by	mental	illness	that	she	was	unable	to	manage	her	own	affairs,	even

with	 treatment?	 It	 would	 have	 been	 cruel	 to	 make	 her	 change	 environments, friends,	 languages,	 and	 doctors	 every	 few	 years;	 and	 it	 would	 have	 been impossible	 because	 many	 countries	 require	 clear	 health	 and	 police	 records	 for long-stay	visas.

At	 the	 time	 that	 my	 relationship	 with	 Pearl	 was	 unraveling,	 and	 I	 was struggling	 to	 deal	 with	 the	 consequences,	 I	 didn’t	 understand	 that	 Pearl	 herself was	unraveling.	Now	that	I	know	the	truth,	I	feel	sorry	Pearl	suffered	for	most	of her	life,	thinking	that	the	people	closest	to	her	were	out	to	get	her.

Watching	Pearl	collapse	was	like	suffering	the	slow	death	of	a	partner	with	no

way	to	say	goodbye.	I	cherish	all	our	years	together,	no	matter	how	painful	some

of	them	were.	It	was	an	honor	to	have	been	her	husband.	We	packed	a	lifetime

into	 those	 years,	 and	 I	 have	 reunited	 with	 Pearl	 many	 times	 in	 my	 dreams.	 I loved	a	deaf	rebel.	I	hope	she	has	found	peace.





Epilogue

It	is	so	great	to	hear	from	you.	We	always	liked	you	and	thought	you	were	the

best	thing	to	happen	to	Pearl.	We	often	wondered	where	you	were	and	how	you

were	doing.	We	were	so	encouraged	when	you	and	Pearl	got	together.	Pearl

seemed	so	happy	with	you	and	we	had	not	seen	that	before.	From	what	we	could

see,	Pearl	truly	loved	you	and	we	were	hopeful	that	the	life	you	made	for

yourselves	would	be	just	what	Pearl	needed.

I	remember	your	place	on	Bowen	Island	and	how	excited	we	were	for	you	guys;

we	couldn’t	wait	to	see	everything	completed.	I	never	would	have	imagined

Pearl	living	and	working	on	Bowen	Island,	and	I	am	amazed	and	proud	of	what

she	accomplished.	Pearl	was	happy	and	funny	and	we	had	some	great	times

before	her	illness	took	hold	of	her.	It	makes	me	sad	that	schizophrenia	robbed

her	of	what	would	have	been	a	good	life	with	you.

We	struggled	to	decide	whether	or	not	to	have	a	conversation	with	you	about

Pearl’s	history	and	felt	it	would	be	disloyal	to	do	so.	We	thought	this	was	a

chance	for	her	to	have	a	good	life	and	the	children	she	talked	about	ever	since

she	was	a	little	girl.	We	also	worried,	from	past	experience,	that	you	would	want to	confirm	anything	we	said	with	Pearl	herself.	We	had	no	idea	how	bad	things

would	get	and	the	price	you	would	have	to	pay.	We	are	sincerely	sorry.

Pearl	continues	to	struggle	with	schizophrenia,	but	as	the	years	have	gone	by	the doctors	have	been	better	at	prescribing	her	medications.	There	were	times	when

she	was	so	heavily	medicated	there	was	no	“Pearl”	there.	She	acknowledges

there’s	something	wrong	in	her	mind	but	not	that	her	reactions	or	feelings	are

wrong,	and	she	strongly	believes	she	has	been	wronged	from	the	time	she	was

born.	Sadly,	the	spark	that	was	Pearl—the	happy,	joyful,	funny	Pearl—is	gone.

Pearl’s	sister,	2019





About	the	Author

Derrick	King	was	born	in	Newfoundland	in	1954,	a	fifth-generation	Canadian

with	a	pioneer’s	gene	for	adventure.	He	earned	his	BASc(EE)	from	the

University	of	British	Columbia	in	1977	and	his	MBA	from	Simon	Fraser

University	in	1988.	He	left	Canada	because	of	the	events	described	in	this	book

and	never	returned	there	to	live.	He	lived	in	the	Netherlands,	Japan,	Australia,

India,	and	Singapore	while	raising	a	family.	He	studied	at	INSEAD	in

Fontainebleau	and	the	Center	for	Creative	Leadership	in	Greensboro	and	was

seconded	to	the	World	Bank	in	Poland	several	times.	He	retired	to	philanthropy

after	thirty-three	years	with	the	same	bank.	He	lives	in	Southeast	Asia	with	his

wife,	where	he	motorcycles,	scuba	dives,	and	watches	the	palm	trees	sway.





Press	Reviews

The	bond	that	grows	between	strangers	living	in	two	worlds	is	compellingly

described,	bringing	revelations	about	prejudice,	acceptance,	handicaps,	and

equality.	Deafness	and	schizophrenia	are	seen	through	intense	love	and	personal

growth	that	brings	a	“you	are	here”	feel	in	a	way	few	memoirs	achieve.	The	role

of	friends	and	family	is	examined	as	King	stands	by	Pearl	while	her	mental

health	collapses.	The	book	is	infused	with	a	passion	that	makes	it	a	riveting

adventure	through	life	and	psyche	that	proves	hard	to	put	down.—Midwest	Book

Review	Bookwatch

http://donovansliteraryservices.com/june-2021-issue.html#lft

King’s	powerful	memoir	is	about	the	difficulty	of	dealing	with	a	loved	one’s

mental	illness	and	disability,	and	how	falling	in	love	with	a	deaf	woman	changed

his	life.	His	love	for	Pearl	is	well	conveyed	in	concise,	accessible	terms	that

capture	the	challenges	of	falling	in	love	with	a	person	who	sees	the	world	in	a

different	way.	The	coverage	of	the	sexual,	physical,	and	psychological	abuse	that she	experienced	is	sobering.	King’s	narration	strives	to	authentically	capture	his feelings	in	the	moment.	Rating:	4	out	of	5.

—Clarion	Reviews	Forward

https://www.forewordreviews.com/reviews/love-for-a-deaf-rebel/

This	candid	account	of	the	author’s	marriage	to	a	deaf	person	vividly	details

their	motorcycle	adventure	to	Guatemala	and	life	on	Bowen	Island.	This

poignant	love	story	is	well	written	and	becomes	a	platform	for	facts	about	the

life	of	deaf	people,	also	delving	into	issues	such	as	schizophrenia,	blindness,	and diabetes.	Those	interested	in	the	stress	that	disabilities	can	place	on	relationships may	wish	to	read	this.	Rating:	Recommended.

—The	US	Review	of	Books

www.theusreview.com/reviews-1/Love-for-a-Deaf-Rebel-by-Derrick-King.html

King’s	love	story	and	memoir	opens	when	he	is	approached	by	Pearl,	a

charismatic	deaf	woman.	Their	chat,	scribbled	on	napkins,	flows	easily,	and

friendship	blossoms.	He	learns	sign	language.	They	move	together	to	isolated

Bowen	Island,	sharing	a	life	of	livestock	and	ferry	rides,	where	her	behavior

becomes	increasingly	erratic.	King	tells	this	honest	and	emotional	story	in	crisp, quick	prose,	with	insights	and	slight	suspense,	respecting	Pearl’s	story	right	up	to its	bittersweet	finish. —Publishers	Weekly	Booklife

booklife.com/project/love-for-a-deaf-rebel-schizophrenia-on-bowen-island-55735





Reader	Comments

I	have	been	moved	in	so	many	ways	by	your	story.	You	have	made	me	laugh,

and	you	have	made	me	cry.	I	am	in	awe	and	want	you	to	know	your	story	has

taken	me	to	places	inside	of	me	to	remember	that	nothing	lasts	and	we	must

cherish	things	as	they	are.	The	light	and	the	dark,	the	good	and	the	bad,	are

intertwined.	Looking	back	at	our	adventures	and	experiences,	we	see	the	truths

in	our	life.—J.P.

This	book	is	powerful!	It	is	amazing.	I	read	the	book	three	times,	and	it	has	been in	my	thoughts	since	my	first	reading.	The	author	put	his	heart	and	soul	into	this book.	His	telling	of	the	journey	taken	by	Pearl	and	him	is	brilliant,	heart-wrenching,	and	insightful.	I	can’t	tell	you	how	much	I	enjoyed	all	the	characters; I	feel	like	I	know	them.	I	can’t	even	imagine	the	amount	of	work	this	book

required.	Thank	you	so	much	for	writing	it	and	sharing	it.—D.G.

I	couldn’t	put	this	book	down.	What	crazy	shit	the	author	went	through—he

lived	the	lives	of	a	thousand	men!—D.B.

This	book	is	fascinating	and	moving,	an	exotic	love	story	however	contorted	the

love.	New	Pearl	was	there	all	along,	the	alter-ego	lying	in	wait	to	be	discovered after	the	honeymoon.	The	author	truly	loved	Pearl	and	was	heartbroken	by	her

ultimate	failure	to	recognize	his	true	love;	how	sad	for	her	indeed!	I	hope	this

book	goes	viral.—P.W.

The	author	has	done	a	masterful	job	of	documenting	Pearl’s	journey.

Schizophrenia	is	very	complicated	and	not	easily	understood.	The	book	would

be	very	helpful	to	anyone	with	a	schizophrenic	family	member	or	friend.—G.G.

This	book	is	fascinating.	The	author	is	a	good	writer	and	my	goodness	but	he	has

had	an	eventful	life.	We	have	all	had	our	sagas	of	love	lost,	and	it	is	unfortunate that	each	generation	has	to	learn	the	lessons	again	with	all	the	heartache.—I.V.

The	book	pulled	me	in	right	away.	The	author	knows	how	to	capture	detail	and

make	the	story	interesting;	readers	would	like	to	be	there	with	them.	It	is

touching	how	the	author	never	stopped	loving	Pearl	despite	everything	that

happened.	He	tried	to	make	things	work	instead	of	rushing	toward	divorce	like

she	did.—D.L.





Also	by	the	Author

Love	for	a	Deaf	Rebel:	Schizophrenia	on	Bowen	Island

PDF	Print	Edition	(356	Pages,	Unabridged	and	Illustrated)

https://archive.org/details/love-for-a-deaf-rebel_20210324





Document Outline


Under the Clock

Shall We Be Magnificent Couple?

A Silent Movie

Guatemala by Motorcycle

The End of the World

Bowen Island

Trout Lake Farm

Men Can’t Be Trusted

Rich Couple’s House

Shooting Pigs in a Sty

Alberta School for the Deaf

I Want a Baby

Where Are the Bullets?

How Did You Find Me?

Down the Road

Love for a Deaf Rebel

Epilogue

About the Author

Press Reviews

Reader Comments

Also By The Author





