There was once a very rich merchant, who had six children, three sons, and,
three daughters; being a man of sense, he spared no cost for their education,
but gave them all kinds of masters. His daughters were extremely handsome,
especially the youngest; when she was little, every body admired her, and,
called her The little Beauty; so that, as she grew up, she still went by the name,
of Beauty, which made her sisters very jealous. The youngest, as she was,
handsome, was also better than her sisters. The two eldest had a great deal of,
pride, because they were rich. They gave themselves ridiculous airs, and,
would not visit other merchants' daughters, nor keep company with any but,
persons of quality. They went out every day upon parties of pleasure, balls,
plays, concerts, etc. and laughed at their youngest sister, because she spent the,
greatest part of her time in reading good books. As it was known that they,
were to have great fortunes, several eminent merchants made their addresses,
to them; but the two eldest said they would never marry, unless they could,
meet with a Duke, or an Earl at least. Beauty very civilly thanked them that,
courted her, and told them she was too young yet to marry, but chose to stay,
with her father a few years longer.
All at once the merchant lost his whole fortune, excepting a small countryhouse at a great distance from town, and told his children, with tears in his
eyes, they most go there and work for their living. The two eldest answered,
that they would not leave the town, for they had several lovers, who they were,
sure would be glad to have them, though they had no fortune; but in this they,
were mistaken, for their lovers slighted and forsook them in their poverty. As,
they were not beloved on account of their pride, every body said, "they do not,
deserve to be pitied, we are glad to see their pride humbled, let them go and,
give themselves quality airs in milking the cows and minding their dairy. But,
(added they,) we are extremely concerned for Beauty, she was such a,
charming, sweet-tempered creature, spoke so kindly to poor people, and was,
of such an affable, obliging disposition." Nay, several gentlemen would have,
married her, though they knew she had not a penny; but she told them she,
could not think of leaving her poor father in his misfortunes, but was,
determined to go along with him into the country to comfort and attend him.
Poor Beauty at first was sadly grieved at the loss of her fortune; "but, (she said,
to herself,) were I to cry ever so much, that would not make things better I,
must try to make myself happy without a fortune." When they came to their,
country-house, the merchant and his three sons applied themselves to,
husbandry and tillage; and Beauty rose at four in the morning, and made haste,
to have the house clean, and breakfast ready for the family. In the beginning,
she found it very difficult, for she had not been used to work as a servant; but,
in less than two months she grew stronger and healthier than ever. After she,
had done her work, she read, played on the harpsichord, or else sung whilst,
she spun. On the contrary, her two sisters did not know how to spend their,
time; they got up at ten, and did nothing but saunter about the whole day,
lamenting the loss of their fine clothes and acquaintance. "Do but see our,
youngest sister, (said they one to the other,) what a poor, stupid mean-spirited,
creature she is, to be contented with such an unhappy situation." The good,
merchant was of a quite different opinion; he knew very well that Beauty outshone her sisters, in her person as well as her mind, and admired her humility,
industry, and patience; for her sisters not only left her all the work of the house,
to do, but insulted her every moment.
The family had lived about a year in this retirement, when the merchant,
received a letter, with an account that a vessel, on board of which he had,
effects, was safely arrived. This news had liked to have turned the heads of the,
two eldest daughters, who immediately flattered themselves with the hopes of,
returning to town; for they were quite weary of a country life; and when they,
saw their father ready to set out, they begged of him to buy them new gowns,
caps, rings, and all manner of trifles; but Beauty asked for nothing, for she,
thought to herself, that all the money her father was going to receive would,
scarce be sufficient to purchase every thing her sisters wanted. "What will you,
have, Beauty?" said her father. "Since you are so kind as to think of me,
(answered she,) be so kind as to bring me a rose, for as none grow hereabouts,
they are a kind of rarity." Not that Beauty cared for a rose, but she asked for,
something, lest she should seem by her example to condemn her sisters',
conduct, who would have said she did it only to look particular. The good man,
went on his journey; but when he came there, they went to law with him about,
the merchandize, and after a great deal of trouble and pains to no purpose, he,
came back as poor as before.
He was within thirty miles of his own house, thinking on the pleasure he,
should have in seeing his children again, when going through a large forest he,
lost himself. It rained and snowed terribly, besides, the wind was so high, that,
it threw him twice off his horse; and night coming on, he began to apprehend,
being either starved to death with cold and hunger, or else devoured by the,
wolves, whom he heard howling all around him, when, on a sudden, looking,
through a long walk of trees, he saw a light at some distance, and going on a,
little farther, perceived it came from a palace illuminated from top to bottom.
The merchant returned God thanks for this happy discovery, and hasted to the,
palace; but was greatly surprised at not meeting with anyone in the out-courts.
His horse followed him, and seeing a large stable open, went in, and finding,
both hay and oats, the poor beast, who was almost famished, fell to eating very,
heartily. The merchant tied him up to the manger, and walked towards the,
house, where he saw no one, but entering into a large hall, he found a good,
fire, and a table plentifully set out, with but one cover laid. As he was wet,
quite through with the rain and snow, he drew near the fire to dry himself. "I,
hope, (said he,) the master of the house, or his servants, will excuse the libert,
I take; I suppose it will not be long before some of them appear."
He waited a considerable time, till it struck eleven, and still nobody came:,
at last he was so hungry that he could stay no longer, but took a chicken and,,
ate it in two mouthfuls, trembling all the while. After this, he drank a few,
glasses of wine, and growing more courageous, he went out of the hall, and,
crossed through several grand apartments with magnificent furniture, till he
came into a chamber, which had an exceeding good bed in it, and as he was,
very much fatigued, and it was past midnight, he concluded it was best to shut,
the door, and go to bed.,
It was ten the next morning before the merchant waked, and as he was,
going to rise, he was astonished to see a good suit of clothes in the room of his,
own, which were quite spoiled. "Certainly, (said he,) this palace belongs to,
some kind fairy, who has seen and pitied my distress." He looked through a,
window, but instead of snow saw the most delightful arbours, interwoven with,
the most beautiful flowers that ever were beheld. He then returned to the great,
hall, where he had supped the night before, and found some chocolate ready,
made on a little table. "Thank you, good Madam Fairy, (said he aloud,) for,
being so careful as to provide me a breakfast; I am extremely obliged to you,
for all your favours."
The good man drank his chocolate, and then went to look for his horse; but,
passing through an arbour of roses, he remembered Beauty's request to him,
and gathered a branch on which were several; immediately he heard a great,
noise, and saw such a frightful beast coming towards him, that he was r,